The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of
 Sherlock Holmes    This ebook is for the use of
 anyone anywhere in the United States andmost ot
her parts of the world at no cost and with almos
t no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, gi
ve it away or re-use it under the termsof the Pr
oject Gutenberg License included with this ebook
 or onlineat www.gutenberg.org. If you are not l
ocated in the United States,you will have to che
ck the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.Title The Adventures of 
Sherlock HolmesAuthor Arthur Conan DoyleRelease 
date March 1, 1999 eBook 1661                Mos
t recently updated October 10, 2023Language Engl
ishCredits an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunt
eer and Jose Menendez START OF THE PROJECT GUTEN
BERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES The
 Adventures of Sherlock Holmesby Arthur Conan Do
yleContents   I.     A Scandal in Bohemia   II. 
   The Red-Headed League   III.   A Case of Iden
tity   IV.    The Boscombe Valley Mystery   V.  
   The Five Orange Pips   VI.    The Man with th
e Twisted Lip   VII.   The Adventure of the Blue
 Carbuncle   VIII.  The Adventure of the Speckle
d Band   IX.    The Adventure of the Engineers T
humb   X.     The Adventure of the Noble Bachelo
r   XI.    The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet   
XII.   The Adventure of the Copper BeechesI. A S
CANDAL IN BOHEMIAI.To Sherlock Holmes she is alw
ays the woman. I have seldom heard himmention he
r under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses
 andpredominates the whole of her sex. It was no
t that he felt any emotionakin to love for Irene
 Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly,
were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirabl
y balanced mind. Hewas, I take it, the most perf
ect reasoning and observing machine thatthe worl
d has seen, but as a lover he would have placed 
himself in afalse position. He never spoke of th
e softer passions, save with a gibeand a sneer. 
They were admirable things for the observer-exce
llent fordrawing the veil from mens motives and 
actions. But for the trainedreasoner to admit su
ch intrusions into his own delicate and finelyad
justed temperament was to introduce a distractin
g factor which mightthrow a doubt upon all his m
ental results. Grit in a sensitiveinstrument, or
 a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, wo
uld notbe more disturbing than a strong emotion 
in a nature such as his. Andyet there was but on
e woman to him, and that woman was the late Iren
eAdler, of dubious and questionable memory.I had
 seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had d
rifted us awayfrom each other. My own complete h
appiness, and the home-centredinterests which ri
se up around the man who first finds himself mas
terof his own establishment, were sufficient to 
absorb all my attention,while Holmes, who loathe
d every form of society with his whole Bohemians
oul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, b
uried among his oldbooks, and alternating from w
eek to week between cocaine and ambition,the dro
wsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of hi
s own keennature. He was still, as ever, deeply 
attracted by the study of crime,and occupied his
 immense faculties and extraordinary powers ofob
servation in following out those clues, and clea
ring up thosemysteries which had been abandoned 
as hopeless by the official police.From time to 
time I heard some vague account of his doings of
 hissummons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff
 murder, of his clearing upof the singular trage
dy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, andf
inally of the mission which he had accomplished 
so delicately andsuccessfully for the reigning f
amily of Holland. Beyond these signs ofhis activ
ity, however, which I merely shared with all the
 readers ofthe daily press, I knew little of my 
former friend and companion.One night-it was on 
the twentieth of March, 1888-I was returning fro
m ajourney to a patient for I had now returned t
o civil practice, whenmy way led me through Bake
r Street. As I passed the well-remembereddoor, w
hich must always be associated in my mind with m
y wooing, andwith the dark incidents of the Stud
y in Scarlet, I was seized with akeen desire to 
see Holmes again, and to know how he was employi
ng hisextraordinary powers. His rooms were brill
iantly lit, and, even as Ilooked up, I saw his t
all, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouett
eagainst the blind. He was pacing the room swift
ly, eagerly, with hishead sunk upon his chest an
d his hands clasped behind him. To me, whoknew h
is every mood and habit, his attitude and manner
 told their ownstory. He was at work again. He h
ad risen out of his drug-createddreams and was h
ot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang th
e belland was shown up to the chamber which had 
formerly been in part my own.His manner was not 
effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I thin
k,to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with
 a kindly eye, he wavedme to an armchair, threw 
across his case of cigars, and indicated aspirit
 case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stoo
d before the fireand looked me over in his singu
lar introspective fashion.Wedlock suits you, he 
remarked. I think, Watson, that you have puton s
even and a half pounds since I saw you.Seven I a
nswered.Indeed, I should have thought a little m
ore. Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson. And in 
practice again, I observe. You did not tell meth
at you intended to go into harness.Then, how do 
you knowI see it, I deduce it. How do I know tha
t you have been gettingyourself very wet lately,
 and that you have a most clumsy and carelessser
vant girlMy dear Holmes, said I, this is too muc
h. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you 
lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had
 acountry walk on Thursday and came home in a dr
eadful mess, but as Ihave changed my clothes I c
ant imagine how you deduce it. As to MaryJane, s
he is incorrigible, and my wife has given her no
tice, but there,again, I fail to see how you wor
k it out.He chuckled to himself and rubbed his l
ong, nervous hands together.It is simplicity its
elf, said he; my eyes tell me that on the inside
of your left shoe, just where the firelight stri
kes it, the leather isscored by six almost paral
lel cuts. Obviously they have been caused bysome
one who has very carelessly scraped round the ed
ges of the sole inorder to remove crusted mud fr
om it. Hence, you see, my doublededuction that y
ou had been out in vile weather, and that you ha
d aparticularly malignant boot-slitting specimen
 of the London slavey. Asto your practice, if a 
gentleman walks into my rooms smelling ofiodofor
m, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon h
is rightforefinger, and a bulge on the right sid
e of his top-hat to show wherehe has secreted hi
s stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do n
otpronounce him to be an active member of the me
dical profession.I could not help laughing at th
e ease with which he explained hisprocess of ded
uction. When I hear you give your reasons, I rem
arked,the thing always appears to me to be so ri
diculously simple that Icould easily do it mysel
f, though at each successive instance of yourrea
soning I am baffled until you explain your proce
ss. And yet Ibelieve that my eyes are as good as
 yours.Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigaret
te, and throwing himselfdown into an armchair. Y
ou see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction i
s clear. For example, you have frequently seen t
he stepswhich lead up from the hall to this room
.Frequently.How oftenWell, some hundreds of time
s.Then how many are thereHow many I dont know.Qu
ite so You have not observed. And yet you have s
een. That is justmy point. Now, I know that ther
e are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen a
nd observed. By the way, since you are intereste
d in theselittle problems, and since you are goo
d enough to chronicle one or twoof my trifling e
xperiences, you may be interested in this. He th
rewover a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper 
which had been lying openupon the table. It came
 by the last post, said he. Read it aloud.The no
te was undated, and without either signature or 
address.There will call upon you to-night, at a 
quarter to eight oclock, itsaid, a gentleman who
 desires to consult you upon a matter of the ver
ydeepest moment. Your recent services to one of 
the royal houses ofEurope have shown that you ar
e one who may safely be trusted withmatters whic
h are of an importance which can hardly be exagg
erated.This account of you we have from all quar
ters received. Be in yourchamber then at that ho
ur, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwear
 a mask.This is indeed a mystery, I remarked. Wh
at do you imagine that itmeansI have no data yet
. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one
 hasdata. Insensibly one begins to twist facts t
o suit theories, instead oftheories to suit fact
s. But the note itself. What do you deduce fromi
tI carefully examined the writing, and the paper
 upon which it waswritten.The man who wrote it w
as presumably well to do, I remarked,endeavourin
g to imitate my companions processes. Such paper
 could notbe bought under half a crown a packet.
 It is peculiarly strong andstiff.Peculiar-that 
is the very word, said Holmes. It is not an Engl
ishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light.I did s
o, and saw a large E with a small g, a P, and a 
large Gwith a small t woven into the texture of 
the paper.What do you make of that asked Holmes.
The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram
, rather.Not at all. The G with the small t stan
ds for Gesellschaft,which is the German for Comp
any. It is a customary contraction likeour Co. P
, of course, stands for Papier. Now for the Eg. 
Let usglance at our Continental Gazetteer. He to
ok down a heavy brown volumefrom his shelves. Eg
low, Eglonitz-here we are, Egria. It is in aGerm
an-speaking country-in Bohemia, not far from Car
lsbad. Remarkableas being the scene of the death
 of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-facto
ries and paper-mills. Ha, ha, my boy, what do yo
u make ofthat His eyes sparkled, and he sent up 
a great blue triumphant cloudfrom his cigarette.
The paper was made in Bohemia, I said.Precisely.
 And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do 
you note thepeculiar construction of the sentenc
e-This account of you we have fromall quarters r
eceived. A Frenchman or Russian could not have w
rittenthat. It is the German who is so uncourteo
us to his verbs. It onlyremains, therefore, to d
iscover what is wanted by this German whowrites 
upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask t
o showing hisface. And here he comes, if I am no
t mistaken, to resolve all ourdoubts.As he spoke
 there was the sharp sound of horses hoofs and g
ratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sha
rp pull at the bell. Holmeswhistled.A pair, by t
he sound, said he. Yes, he continued, glancing o
ut ofthe window. A nice little brougham and a pa
ir of beauties. A hundredand fifty guineas apiec
e. Theres money in this case, Watson, if thereis
 nothing else.I think that I had better go, Holm
es.Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am l
ost without my Boswell.And this promises to be i
nteresting. It would be a pity to miss it.But yo
ur client-Never mind him. I may want your help, 
and so may he. Here he comes.Sit down in that ar
mchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention.
A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon
 the stairs and in thepassage, paused immediatel
y outside the door. Then there was a loud andaut
horitative tap.Come in said Holmes.A man entered
 who could hardly have been less than six feet s
ix inchesin height, with the chest and limbs of 
a Hercules. His dress was richwith a richness wh
ich would, in England, be looked upon as akin to
 badtaste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed
 across the sleeves andfronts of his double-brea
sted coat, while the deep blue cloak which wasth
rown over his shoulders was lined with flame-col
oured silk andsecured at the neck with a brooch 
which consisted of a single flamingberyl. Boots 
which extended halfway up his calves, and which 
weretrimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, com
pleted the impression ofbarbaric opulence which 
was suggested by his whole appearance. Hecarried
 a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore 
across the upperpart of his face, extending down
 past the cheekbones, a black vizardmask, which 
he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for
 his handwas still raised to it as he entered. F
rom the lower part of the facehe appeared to be 
a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging
 lip,and a long, straight chin suggestive of res
olution pushed to the lengthof obstinacy.You had
 my note he asked with a deep harsh voice and a 
stronglymarked German accent. I told you that I 
would call. He looked fromone to the other of us
, as if uncertain which to address.Pray take a s
eat, said Holmes. This is my friend and colleagu
e, Dr.Watson, who is occasionally good enough to
 help me in my cases. Whomhave I the honour to a
ddressYou may address me as the Count Von Kramm,
 a Bohemian nobleman. Iunderstand that this gent
leman, your friend, is a man of honour anddiscre
tion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most
 extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefer
 to communicate with youalone.I rose to go, but 
Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back
 intomy chair. It is both, or none, said he. You
 may say before thisgentleman anything which you
 may say to me.The Count shrugged his broad shou
lders. Then I must begin, said he,by binding you
 both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the 
end ofthat time the matter will be of no importa
nce. At present it is not toomuch to say that it
 is of such weight it may have an influence upon
European history.I promise, said Holmes.And I.Yo
u will excuse this mask, continued our strange v
isitor. The augustperson who employs me wishes h
is agent to be unknown to you, and I mayconfess 
at once that the title by which I have just call
ed myself isnot exactly my own.I was aware of it
, said Holmes dryly.The circumstances are of gre
at delicacy, and every precaution has tobe taken
 to quench what might grow to be an immense scan
dal andseriously compromise one of the reigning 
families of Europe. To speakplainly, the matter 
implicates the great House of Ormstein, heredita
rykings of Bohemia.I was also aware of that, mur
mured Holmes, settling himself down inhis armcha
ir and closing his eyes.Our visitor glanced with
 some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging 
figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted
 to him as themost incisive reasoner and most en
ergetic agent in Europe. Holmesslowly reopened h
is eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic c
lient.If your Majesty would condescend to state 
your case, he remarked, Ishould be better able t
o advise you.The man sprang from his chair and p
aced up and down the room inuncontrollable agita
tion. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he to
rethe mask from his face and hurled it upon the 
ground. You are right,he cried; I am the King. W
hy should I attempt to conceal itWhy, indeed mur
mured Holmes. Your Majesty had not spoken before
 Iwas aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsr
eich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of Cassel
-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia.But you
 can understand, said our strange visitor, sitti
ng down oncemore and passing his hand over his h
igh white forehead, you canunderstand that I am 
not accustomed to doing such business in my ownp
erson. Yet the matter was so delicate that I cou
ld not confide it toan agent without putting mys
elf in his power. I have come incognitofrom Prag
ue for the purpose of consulting you.Then, pray 
consult, said Holmes, shutting his eyes once mor
e.The facts are briefly these Some five years ag
o, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the a
cquaintance of the well-known adventuress,Irene 
Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.Kind
ly look her up in my index, Doctor, murmured Hol
mes withoutopening his eyes. For many years he h
ad adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs c
oncerning men and things, so that it was difficu
lt toname a subject or a person on which he coul
d not at once furnishinformation. In this case I
 found her biography sandwiched in betweenthat o
f a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander w
ho had written amonograph upon the deep-sea fish
es.Let me see said Holmes. Hum Born in New Jerse
y in the year 1858.Contralto-hum La Scala, hum P
rima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw-yesRetired f
rom operatic stage-ha Living in London-quite so 
YourMajesty, as I understand, became entangled w
ith this young person,wrote her some compromisin
g letters, and is now desirous of gettingthose l
etters back.Precisely so. But how-Was there a se
cret marriageNone.No legal papers or certificate
sNone.Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If thi
s young person shouldproduce her letters for bla
ckmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove 
their authenticityThere is the writing.Pooh, poo
h Forgery.My private note-paper.Stolen.My own se
al.Imitated.My photograph.Bought.We were both in
 the photograph.Oh, dear That is very bad Your M
ajesty has indeed committed anindiscretion.I was
 mad-insane.You have compromised yourself seriou
sly.I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I
 am but thirty now.It must be recovered.We have 
tried and failed.Your Majesty must pay. It must 
be bought.She will not sell.Stolen, then.Five at
tempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay 
ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggage
 when she travelled. Twice she hasbeen waylaid. 
There has been no result.No sign of itAbsolutely
 none.Holmes laughed. It is quite a pretty littl
e problem, said he.But a very serious one to me,
 returned the King reproachfully.Very, indeed. A
nd what does she propose to do with the photogra
phTo ruin me.But howI am about to be married.So 
I have heard.To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Mening
en, second daughter of the King ofScandinavia. Y
ou may know the strict principles of her family.
 She isherself the very soul of delicacy. A shad
ow of a doubt as to my conductwould bring the ma
tter to an end.And Irene AdlerThreatens to send 
them the photograph. And she will do it. I know 
thatshe will do it. You do not know her, but she
 has a soul of steel. Shehas the face of the mos
t beautiful of women, and the mind of the mostre
solute of men. Rather than I should marry anothe
r woman, there are nolengths to which she would 
not go-none.You are sure that she has not sent i
t yetI am sure.And whyBecause she has said that 
she would send it on the day when thebetrothal w
as publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday
.Oh, then we have three days yet, said Holmes wi
th a yawn. That isvery fortunate, as I have one 
or two matters of importance to look intojust at
 present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in 
London for thepresentCertainly. You will find me
 at the Langham under the name of the CountVon K
ramm.Then I shall drop you a line to let you kno
w how we progress.Pray do so. I shall be all anx
iety.Then, as to moneyYou have carte blanche.Abs
olutelyI tell you that I would give one of the p
rovinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph.An
d for present expensesThe King took a heavy cham
ois leather bag from under his cloak and laidit 
on the table.There are three hundred pounds in g
old and seven hundred in notes, hesaid.Holmes sc
ribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book 
and handed itto him.And Mademoiselles address he
 asked.Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. J
ohns Wood.Holmes took a note of it. One other qu
estion, said he. Was thephotograph a cabinetIt w
as.Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust t
hat we shall soon havesome good news for you. An
d good-night, Watson, he added, as thewheels of 
the royal brougham rolled down the street. If yo
u will begood enough to call to-morrow afternoon
 at three oclock I should liketo chat this littl
e matter over with you.II.At three oclock precis
ely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had notyet
 returned. The landlady informed me that he had 
left the houseshortly after eight oclock in the 
morning. I sat down beside the fire,however, wit
h the intention of awaiting him, however long he
 might be.I was already deeply interested in his
 inquiry, for, though it wassurrounded by none o
f the grim and strange features which wereassoci
ated with the two crimes which I have already re
corded, still,the nature of the case and the exa
lted station of his client gave it acharacter of
 its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of thein
vestigation which my friend had on hand, there w
as something in hismasterly grasp of a situation
, and his keen, incisive reasoning, whichmade it
 a pleasure to me to study his system of work, a
nd to follow thequick, subtle methods by which h
e disentangled the most inextricablemysteries. S
o accustomed was I to his invariable success tha
t the verypossibility of his failing had ceased 
to enter into my head.It was close upon four bef
ore the door opened, and a drunken-lookinggroom,
 ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed 
face anddisreputable clothes, walked into the ro
om. Accustomed as I was to myfriends amazing pow
ers in the use of disguises, I had to look three
times before I was certain that it was indeed he
. With a nod hevanished into the bedroom, whence
 he emerged in five minutestweed-suited and resp
ectable, as of old. Putting his hands into hispo
ckets, he stretched out his legs in front of the
 fire and laughedheartily for some minutes.Well,
 really he cried, and then he choked and laughed
 again until hewas obliged to lie back, limp and
 helpless, in the chair.What is itIts quite too 
funny. I am sure you could never guess how I emp
loyedmy morning, or what I ended by doing.I cant
 imagine. I suppose that you have been watching 
the habits, andperhaps the house, of Miss Irene 
Adler.Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusua
l. I will tell you, however.I left the house a l
ittle after eight oclock this morning in thechar
acter of a groom out of work. There is a wonderf
ul sympathy andfreemasonry among horsey men. Be 
one of them, and you will know allthat there is 
to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a bijo
uvilla, with a garden at the back, but built out
 in front right up tothe road, two stories. Chub
b lock to the door. Large sitting-room onthe rig
ht side, well furnished, with long windows almos
t to the floor,and those preposterous English wi
ndow fasteners which a child couldopen. Behind t
here was nothing remarkable, save that the passa
ge windowcould be reached from the top of the co
ach-house. I walked round it andexamined it clos
ely from every point of view, but without noting
anything else of interest.I then lounged down th
e street and found, as I expected, that therewas
 a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of
 the garden. I lentthe ostlers a hand in rubbing
 down their horses, and received inexchange twop
ence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of sha
g tobacco,and as much information as I could des
ire about Miss Adler, to saynothing of half a do
zen other people in the neighbourhood in whom I 
wasnot in the least interested, but whose biogra
phies I was compelled tolisten to.And what of Ir
ene Adler I asked.Oh, she has turned all the men
s heads down in that part. She is thedaintiest t
hing under a bonnet on this planet. So say theSe
rpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sing
s at concerts, drivesout at five every day, and 
returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldomgoes ou
t at other times, except when she sings. Has onl
y one malevisitor, but a good deal of him. He is
 dark, handsome, and dashing,never calls less th
an once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. Godf
reyNorton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantag
es of a cabman as aconfidant. They had driven hi
m home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews,and kn
ew all about him. When I had listened to all the
y had to tell, Ibegan to walk up and down near B
riony Lodge once more, and to thinkover my plan 
of campaign.This Godfrey Norton was evidently an
 important factor in the matter.He was a lawyer.
 That sounded ominous. What was the relation bet
weenthem, and what the object of his repeated vi
sits Was she his client,his friend, or his mistr
ess If the former, she had probablytransferred t
he photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it 
was lesslikely. On the issue of this question de
pended whether I shouldcontinue my work at Brion
y Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentlemans c
hambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, 
and itwidened the field of my inquiry. I fear th
at I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to l
et you see my little difficulties, if you areto 
understand the situation.I am following you clos
ely, I answered.I was still balancing the matter
 in my mind when a hansom cab drove upto Briony 
Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a rema
rkablyhandsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustach
ed-evidently the man of whomI had heard. He appe
ared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabm
anto wait, and brushed past the maid who opened 
the door with the air ofa man who was thoroughly
 at home.He was in the house about half an hour,
 and I could catch glimpses ofhim in the windows
 of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talkin
gexcitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could 
see nothing. Presentlyhe emerged, looking even m
ore flurried than before. As he stepped up tothe
 cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and
 looked at itearnestly, Drive like the devil, he
 shouted, first to Gross Hankeys in Regent Stree
t, and then to the Church of St. Monica in theEd
geware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twent
y minutesAway they went, and I was just wonderin
g whether I should not do wellto follow them whe
n up the lane came a neat little landau, the coa
chmanwith his coat only half-buttoned, and his t
ie under his ear, while allthe tags of his harne
ss were sticking out of the buckles. It hadntpul
led up before she shot out of the hall door and 
into it. I onlycaught a glimpse of her at the mo
ment, but she was a lovely woman, witha face tha
t a man might die for.The Church of St. Monica, 
John, she cried, and half a sovereign ifyou reac
h it in twenty minutes.This was quite too good t
o lose, Watson. I was just balancing whetherI sh
ould run for it, or whether I should perch behin
d her landau when acab came through the street. 
The driver looked twice at such a shabbyfare, bu
t I jumped in before he could object. The Church
 of St.Monica, said I, and half a sovereign if y
ou reach it in twentyminutes. It was twenty-five
 minutes to twelve, and of course it wasclear en
ough what was in the wind.My cabby drove fast. I
 dont think I ever drove faster, but the othersw
ere there before us. The cab and the landau with
 their steaming horseswere in front of the door 
when I arrived. I paid the man and hurriedinto t
he church. There was not a soul there save the t
wo whom I hadfollowed and a surpliced clergyman,
 who seemed to be expostulating withthem. They w
ere all three standing in a knot in front of the
 altar. Ilounged up the side aisle like any othe
r idler who has dropped into achurch. Suddenly, 
to my surprise, the three at the altar faced rou
nd tome, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard
 as he could towards me.Thank God, he cried. You
ll do. Come ComeWhat then I asked.Come, man, com
e, only three minutes, or it wont be legal.I was
 half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew
 where I was Ifound myself mumbling responses wh
ich were whispered in my ear, andvouching for th
ings of which I knew nothing, and generally assi
sting inthe secure tying up of Irene Adler, spin
ster, to Godfrey Norton,bachelor. It was all don
e in an instant, and there was the gentlemanthan
king me on the one side and the lady on the othe
r, while theclergyman beamed on me in front. It 
was the most preposterous positionin which I eve
r found myself in my life, and it was the though
t of itthat started me laughing just now. It see
ms that there had been someinformality about the
ir license, that the clergyman absolutely refuse
dto marry them without a witness of some sort, a
nd that my luckyappearance saved the bridegroom 
from having to sally out into thestreets in sear
ch of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign,
 and Imean to wear it on my watch chain in memor
y of the occasion.This is a very unexpected turn
 of affairs, said I; and what thenWell, I found 
my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if
 thepair might take an immediate departure, and 
so necessitate very promptand energetic measures
 on my part. At the church door, however, theyse
parated, he driving back to the Temple, and she 
to her own house. Ishall drive out in the park a
t five as usual, she said as she lefthim. I hear
d no more. They drove away in different directio
ns, and Iwent off to make my own arrangements.Wh
ich areSome cold beef and a glass of beer, he an
swered, ringing the bell. Ihave been too busy to
 think of food, and I am likely to be busier sti
llthis evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want
 your co-operation.I shall be delighted.You dont
 mind breaking the lawNot in the least.Nor runni
ng a chance of arrestNot in a good cause.Oh, the
 cause is excellentThen I am your man.I was sure
 that I might rely on you.But what is it you wis
hWhen Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will
 make it clear to you.Now, he said as he turned 
hungrily on the simple fare that ourlandlady had
 provided, I must discuss it while I eat, for I 
have notmuch time. It is nearly five now. In two
 hours we must be on the sceneof action. Miss Ir
ene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive a
tseven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her.A
nd what thenYou must leave that to me. I have al
ready arranged what is to occur.There is only on
e point on which I must insist. You must not int
erfere,come what may. You understandI am to be n
eutralTo do nothing whatever. There will probabl
y be some smallunpleasantness. Do not join in it
. It will end in my being conveyedinto the house
. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-ro
om windowwill open. You are to station yourself 
close to that open window.Yes.You are to watch m
e, for I will be visible to you.Yes.And when I r
aise my hand-so-you will throw into the room wha
t I giveyou to throw, and will, at the same time
, raise the cry of fire. Youquite follow meEntir
ely.It is nothing very formidable, he said, taki
ng a long cigar-shapedroll from his pocket. It i
s an ordinary plumbers smoke-rocket, fittedwith 
a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Yo
ur task isconfined to that. When you raise your 
cry of fire, it will be taken upby quite a numbe
r of people. You may then walk to the end of the
street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I 
hope that I have mademyself clearI am to remain 
neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, a
nd atthe signal to throw in this object, then to
 raise the cry of fire, andto wait you at the co
rner of the street.Precisely.Then you may entire
ly rely on me.That is excellent. I think, perhap
s, it is almost time that I preparefor the new r
ole I have to play.He disappeared into his bedro
om and returned in a few minutes in thecharacter
 of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist c
lergyman. Hisbroad black hat, his baggy trousers
, his white tie, his sympatheticsmile, and gener
al look of peering and benevolent curiosity were
 suchas Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled.
 It was not merely thatHolmes changed his costum
e. His expression, his manner, his very soulseem
ed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed
. The stage lost afine actor, even as science lo
st an acute reasoner, when he became aspecialist
 in crime.It was a quarter past six when we left
 Baker Street, and it stillwanted ten minutes to
 the hour when we found ourselves in SerpentineA
venue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were j
ust being lighted aswe paced up and down in fron
t of Briony Lodge, waiting for the comingof its 
occupant. The house was just such as I had pictu
red it fromSherlock Holmes succinct description,
 but the locality appeared to beless private tha
n I expected. On the contrary, for a small stree
t in aquiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably ani
mated. There was a group ofshabbily dressed men 
smoking and laughing in a corner, ascissors-grin
der with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirt
ing with anurse-girl, and several well-dressed y
oung men who were lounging up anddown with cigar
s in their mouths.You see, remarked Holmes, as w
e paced to and fro in front of thehouse, this ma
rriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph
 becomesa double-edged weapon now. The chances a
re that she would be as averseto its being seen 
by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its c
omingto the eyes of his princess. Now the questi
on is, Where are we to findthe photographWhere, 
indeedIt is most unlikely that she carries it ab
out with her. It is cabinetsize. Too large for e
asy concealment about a womans dress. She knowst
hat the King is capable of having her waylaid an
d searched. Twoattempts of the sort have already
 been made. We may take it, then, thatshe does n
ot carry it about with her.Where, thenHer banker
 or her lawyer. There is that double possibility
. But I aminclined to think neither. Women are n
aturally secretive, and they liketo do their own
 secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyon
e elseShe could trust her own guardianship, but 
she could not tell whatindirect or political inf
luence might be brought to bear upon abusiness m
an. Besides, remember that she had resolved to u
se it withina few days. It must be where she can
 lay her hands upon it. It must bein her own hou
se.But it has twice been burgled.Pshaw They did 
not know how to look.But how will you lookI will
 not look.What thenI will get her to show me.But
 she will refuse.She will not be able to. But I 
hear the rumble of wheels. It is hercarriage. No
w carry out my orders to the letter.As he spoke 
the gleam of the sidelights of a carriage came r
ound thecurve of the avenue. It was a smart litt
le landau which rattled up tothe door of Briony 
Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men a
tthe corner dashed forward to open the door in t
he hope of earning acopper, but was elbowed away
 by another loafer, who had rushed up withthe sa
me intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which 
was increased bythe two guardsmen, who took side
s with one of the loungers, and by thescissors-g
rinder, who was equally hot upon the other side.
 A blow wasstruck, and in an instant the lady, w
ho had stepped from her carriage,was the centre 
of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, 
whostruck savagely at each other with their fist
s and sticks. Holmesdashed into the crowd to pro
tect the lady; but, just as he reached her,he ga
ve a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blo
od running freelydown his face. At his fall the 
guardsmen took to their heels in onedirection an
d the loungers in the other, while a number of b
etterdressed people, who had watched the scuffle
 without taking part in it,crowded in to help th
e lady and to attend to the injured man. IreneAd
ler, as I will still call her, had hurried up th
e steps; but shestood at the top with her superb
 figure outlined against the lights ofthe hall, 
looking back into the street.Is the poor gentlem
an much hurt she asked.He is dead, cried several
 voices.No, no, theres life in him shouted anoth
er. But hell be gonebefore you can get him to ho
spital.Hes a brave fellow, said a woman. They wo
uld have had the ladyspurse and watch if it hadn
t been for him. They were a gang, and arough one
, too. Ah, hes breathing now.He cant lie in the 
street. May we bring him in, marmSurely. Bring h
im into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable
 sofa.This way, pleaseSlowly and solemnly he was
 borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in theprin
cipal room, while I still observed the proceedin
gs from my post bythe window. The lamps had been
 lit, but the blinds had not been drawn,so that 
I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I d
o not knowwhether he was seized with compunction
 at that moment for the part hewas playing, but 
I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed o
fmyself in my life than when I saw the beautiful
 creature against whom Iwas conspiring, or the g
race and kindliness with which she waited uponth
e injured man. And yet it would be the blackest 
treachery to Holmesto draw back now from the par
t which he had intrusted to me. I hardenedmy hea
rt, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulst
er. After all, Ithought, we are not injuring her
. We are but preventing her frominjuring another
.Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him
 motion like a man whois in need of air. A maid 
rushed across and threw open the window. Atthe s
ame instant I saw him raise his hand and at the 
signal I tossed myrocket into the room with a cr
y of Fire The word was no sooner outof my mouth 
than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed
 andill-gentlemen, ostlers, and servant maids-jo
ined in a general shriek ofFire Thick clouds of 
smoke curled through the room and out at theopen
 window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, 
and a moment laterthe voice of Holmes from withi
n assuring them that it was a falsealarm. Slippi
ng through the shouting crowd I made my way to t
he cornerof the street, and in ten minutes was r
ejoiced to find my friends armin mine, and to ge
t away from the scene of uproar. He walked swift
lyand in silence for some few minutes until we h
ad turned down one of thequiet streets which lea
d towards the Edgeware Road.You did it very nice
ly, Doctor, he remarked. Nothing could have been
better. It is all right.You have the photographI
 know where it is.And how did you find outShe sh
owed me, as I told you she would.I am still in t
he dark.I do not wish to make a mystery, said he
, laughing. The matter wasperfectly simple. You,
 of course, saw that everyone in the street wasa
n accomplice. They were all engaged for the even
ing.I guessed as much.Then, when the row broke o
ut, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm of
 my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped m
y hand to myface, and became a piteous spectacle
. It is an old trick.That also I could fathom.Th
en they carried me in. She was bound to have me 
in. What else couldshe do And into her sitting-r
oom, which was the very room which Isuspected. I
t lay between that and her bedroom, and I was de
termined tosee which. They laid me on a couch, I
 motioned for air, they werecompelled to open th
e window, and you had your chance.How did that h
elp youIt was all-important. When a woman thinks
 that her house is on fire,her instinct is at on
ce to rush to the thing which she values most. I
tis a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have
 more than once takenadvantage of it. In the cas
e of the Darlington Substitution Scandal itwas o
f use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle bu
siness. A marriedwoman grabs at her baby; an unm
arried one reaches for her jewel-box.Now it was 
clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing 
in the housemore precious to her than what we ar
e in quest of. She would rush tosecure it. The a
larm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and s
houtingwere enough to shake nerves of steel. She
 responded beautifully. Thephotograph is in a re
cess behind a sliding panel just above the right
bell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I ca
ught a glimpse of it asshe half drew it out. Whe
n I cried out that it was a false alarm, sherepl
aced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the 
room, and I havenot seen her since. I rose, and,
 making my excuses, escaped from thehouse. I hes
itated whether to attempt to secure the photogra
ph at once;but the coachman had come in, and as 
he was watching me narrowly, itseemed safer to w
ait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all.And
 now I asked.Our quest is practically finished. 
I shall call with the Kingto-morrow, and with yo
u, if you care to come with us. We will be shown
into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but 
it is probable thatwhen she comes she may find n
either us nor the photograph. It might bea satis
faction to his Majesty to regain it with his own
 hands.And when will you callAt eight in the mor
ning. She will not be up, so that we shall have 
aclear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for th
is marriage may mean acomplete change in her lif
e and habits. I must wire to the King withoutdel
ay.We had reached Baker Street and had stopped a
t the door. He wassearching his pockets for the 
key when someone passing saidGood-night, Mister 
Sherlock Holmes.There were several people on the
 pavement at the time, but the greetingappeared 
to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had h
urried by.Ive heard that voice before, said Holm
es, staring down the dimly litstreet. Now, I won
der who the deuce that could have been.III.I sle
pt at Baker Street that night, and we were engag
ed upon our toastand coffee in the morning when 
the King of Bohemia rushed into theroom.You have
 really got it he cried, grasping Sherlock Holme
s by eithershoulder and looking eagerly into his
 face.Not yet.But you have hopesI have hopes.The
n, come. I am all impatience to be gone.We must 
have a cab.No, my brougham is waiting.Then that 
will simplify matters. We descended and started 
off oncemore for Briony Lodge.Irene Adler is mar
ried, remarked Holmes.Married WhenYesterday.But 
to whomTo an English lawyer named Norton.But she
 could not love him.I am in hopes that she does.
And why in hopesBecause it would spare your Maje
sty all fear of future annoyance. Ifthe lady lov
es her husband, she does not love your Majesty. 
If she doesnot love your Majesty, there is no re
ason why she should interfere withyour Majestys 
plan.It is true. And yet- Well I wish she had be
en of my own stationWhat a queen she would have 
made He relapsed into a moody silence,which was 
not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue
.The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elder
ly woman stood upon thesteps. She watched us wit
h a sardonic eye as we stepped from thebrougham.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe said she.I am Mr.
 Holmes, answered my companion, looking at her w
ith aquestioning and rather startled gaze.Indeed
 My mistress told me that you were likely to cal
l. She leftthis morning with her husband by the 
515 train from Charing Cross forthe Continent.Wh
at Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with ch
agrin andsurprise. Do you mean that she has left
 EnglandNever to return.And the papers asked the
 King hoarsely. All is lost.We shall see. He pus
hed past the servant and rushed into thedrawing-
room, followed by the King and myself. The furni
ture wasscattered about in every direction, with
 dismantled shelves and opendrawers, as if the l
ady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flig
ht.Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a s
mall sliding shutter, and,plunging in his hand, 
pulled out a photograph and a letter. Thephotogr
aph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress,
 the letter wassuperscribed to Sherlock Holmes, 
Esq. To be left till called for. Myfriend tore i
t open, and we all three read it together. It wa
s dated atmidnight of the preceding night and ra
n in this way    MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,-Yo
u really did it very well. You took    me in com
pletely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had no
t a    suspicion. But then, when I found how I h
ad betrayed myself, I    began to think. I had b
een warned against you months ago. I had    been
 told that, if the King employed an agent, it wo
uld certainly    be you. And your address had be
en given me. Yet, with all this, you    made me 
reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I bec
ame    suspicious, I found it hard to think evil
 of such a dear, kind old    clergyman. But, you
 know, I have been trained as an actress myself.
    Male costume is nothing new to me. I often t
ake advantage of the    freedom which it gives. 
I sent John, the coachman, to watch you,    ran 
upstairs, got into my walking clothes, as I call
 them, and came    down just as you departed.   
 Well, I followed you to your door, and so made 
sure that I was    really an object of interest 
to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes.    Then I
, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and
 started for    the Temple to see my husband.   
 We both thought the best resource was flight, w
hen pursued by so    formidable an antagonist; s
o you will find the nest empty when you    call 
to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may
 rest in    peace. I love and am loved by a bett
er man than he. The King may do    what he will 
without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly  
  wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself, a
nd to preserve a    weapon which will always sec
ure me from any steps which he might    take in 
the future. I leave a photograph which he might 
care to    possess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherl
ock Holmes,    Very truly yours,    IRENE NORTON
, ne ADLER.What a woman-oh, what a woman cried t
he King of Bohemia, when we hadall three read th
is epistle. Did I not tell you how quick and res
oluteshe was Would she not have made an admirabl
e queen Is it not a pitythat she was not on my l
evelFrom what I have seen of the lady, she seems
, indeed, to be on a verydifferent level to your
 Majesty, said Holmes coldly. I am sorry thatI h
ave not been able to bring your Majestys busines
s to a moresuccessful conclusion.On the contrary
, my dear sir, cried the King; nothing could be 
moresuccessful. I know that her word is inviolat
e. The photograph is now assafe as if it were in
 the fire.I am glad to hear your Majesty say so.
I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in 
what way I can rewardyou. This ring- He slipped 
an emerald snake ring from his finger andheld it
 out upon the palm of his hand.Your Majesty has 
something which I should value even more highly,
said Holmes.You have but to name it.This photogr
aphThe King stared at him in amazement.Irenes ph
otograph he cried. Certainly, if you wish it.I t
hank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be d
one in the matter.I have the honour to wish you 
a very good morning. He bowed, and,turning away 
without observing the hand which the King had st
retchedout to him, he set off in my company for 
his chambers.And that was how a great scandal th
reatened to affect the kingdom ofBohemia, and ho
w the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were bea
ten by awomans wit. He used to make merry over t
he cleverness of women, but Ihave not heard him 
do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler
, orwhen he refers to her photograph, it is alwa
ys under the honourabletitle of the woman.II. TH
E RED-HEADED LEAGUE I had called upon my friend,
 Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of l
ast year and found him in deep conversation with
 a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman w
ith fiery red hair. With an apology for my intru
sion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled
 me abruptly into the room and closed the door b
ehind me.You could not possibly have come at a b
etter time, my dear Watson, hesaid cordially.I w
as afraid that you were engaged.So I am. Very mu
ch so.Then I can wait in the next room.Not at al
l. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partn
er and helperin many of my most successful cases
, and I have no doubt that he willbe of the utmo
st use to me in yours also.The stout gentleman h
alf rose from his chair and gave a bob ofgreetin
g, with a quick little questioning glance from h
is smallfat-encircled eyes.Try the settee, said 
Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and puttingh
is fingertips together, as was his custom when i
n judicial moods. Iknow, my dear Watson, that yo
u share my love of all that is bizarre andoutsid
e the conventions and humdrum routine of everyda
y life. You haveshown your relish for it by the 
enthusiasm which has prompted you tochronicle, a
nd, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to
 embellishso many of my own little adventures.Yo
ur cases have indeed been of the greatest intere
st to me, Iobserved.You will remember that I rem
arked the other day, just before we wentinto the
 very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Suth
erland, thatfor strange effects and extraordinar
y combinations we must go to lifeitself, which i
s always far more daring than any effort of thei
magination.A proposition which I took the libert
y of doubting.You did, Doctor, but none the less
 you must come round to my view, forotherwise I 
shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until
 yourreason breaks down under them and acknowled
ges me to be right. Now, Mr.Jabez Wilson here ha
s been good enough to call upon me this morning,
and to begin a narrative which promises to be on
e of the most singularwhich I have listened to f
or some time. You have heard me remark thatthe s
trangest and most unique things are very often c
onnected not withthe larger but with the smaller
 crimes, and occasionally, indeed, wherethere is
 room for doubt whether any positive crime has b
een committed.As far as I have heard, it is impo
ssible for me to say whether thepresent case is 
an instance of crime or not, but the course of e
ventsis certainly among the most singular that I
 have ever listened to.Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you 
would have the great kindness to recommenceyour 
narrative. I ask you not merely because my frien
d Dr. Watson hasnot heard the opening part but a
lso because the peculiar nature of thestory make
s me anxious to have every possible detail from 
your lips. Asa rule, when I have heard some slig
ht indication of the course ofevents, I am able 
to guide myself by the thousands of other simila
rcases which occur to my memory. In the present 
instance I am forced toadmit that the facts are,
 to the best of my belief, unique.The portly cli
ent puffed out his chest with an appearance of s
omelittle pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled 
newspaper from the insidepocket of his greatcoat
. As he glanced down the advertisement column,wi
th his head thrust forward and the paper flatten
ed out upon his knee,I took a good look at the m
an and endeavoured, after the fashion of mycompa
nion, to read the indications which might be pre
sented by hisdress or appearance.I did not gain 
very much, however, by my inspection. Our visito
r boreevery mark of being an average commonplace
 British tradesman, obese,pompous, and slow. He 
wore rather baggy grey shepherds check trousers,
a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in
 the front, and a drabwaistcoat with a heavy bra
ssy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit ofmet
al dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-ha
t and a faded brownovercoat with a wrinkled velv
et collar lay upon a chair beside him.Altogether
, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable 
about the mansave his blazing red head, and the 
expression of extreme chagrin anddiscontent upon
 his features.Sherlock Holmes quick eye took in 
my occupation, and he shook his headwith a smile
 as he noticed my questioning glances. Beyond th
e obviousfacts that he has at some time done man
ual labour, that he takes snuff,that he is a Fre
emason, that he has been in China, and that he h
as donea considerable amount of writing lately, 
I can deduce nothing else.Mr. Jabez Wilson start
ed up in his chair, with his forefinger upon the
paper, but his eyes upon my companion.How, in th
e name of good-fortune, did you know all that, M
r. Holmeshe asked. How did you know, for example
, that I did manual labour.Its as true as gospel
, for I began as a ships carpenter.Your hands, m
y dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larg
er thanyour left. You have worked with it, and t
he muscles are moredeveloped.Well, the snuff, th
en, and the FreemasonryI wont insult your intell
igence by telling you how I read that,especially
 as, rather against the strict rules of your ord
er, you usean arc-and-compass breastpin.Ah, of c
ourse, I forgot that. But the writingWhat else c
an be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny
 for fiveinches, and the left one with the smoot
h patch near the elbow where yourest it upon the
 deskWell, but ChinaThe fish that you have tatto
oed immediately above your right wristcould only
 have been done in China. I have made a small st
udy of tattoomarks and have even contributed to 
the literature of the subject. Thattrick of stai
ning the fishes scales of a delicate pink is qui
tepeculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a 
Chinese coin hanging fromyour watch-chain, the m
atter becomes even more simple.Mr. Jabez Wilson 
laughed heavily. Well, I never said he. I though
tat first that you had done something clever, bu
t I see that there wasnothing in it after all.I 
begin to think, Watson, said Holmes, that I make
 a mistake inexplaining. Omne ignotum pro magnif
ico, you know, and my poorlittle reputation, suc
h as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am socand
id. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wils
onYes, I have got it now, he answered with his t
hick red finger plantedhalfway down the column. 
Here it is. This is what began it all. Youjust r
ead it for yourself, sir.I took the paper from h
im and read as followsTO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE O
n account of the bequest of the lateEzekiah Hopk
ins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is 
now anothervacancy open which entitles a member 
of the League to a salary of  4 aweek for purely
 nominal services. All red-headed men who are so
und inbody and mind and above the age of twenty-
one years, are eligible.Apply in person on Monda
y, at eleven oclock, to Duncan Ross, at theoffic
es of the League, 7 Popes Court, Fleet Street.Wh
at on earth does this mean I ejaculated after I 
had twice readover the extraordinary announcemen
t.Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as 
was his habit when inhigh spirits. It is a littl
e off the beaten track, isnt it said he.And now,
 Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us a
ll aboutyourself, your household, and the effect
 which this advertisement hadupon your fortunes.
 You will first make a note, Doctor, of the pape
rand the date.It is The Morning Chronicle of Apr
il 27, 1890. Just two months ago.Very good. Now,
 Mr. WilsonWell, it is just as I have been telli
ng you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,said Jabez Wilson, m
opping his forehead; I have a small pawnbrokersb
usiness at Coburg Square, near the City. Its not
 a very large affair,and of late years it has no
t done more than just give me a living. Iused to
 be able to keep two assistants, but now I only 
keep one; and Iwould have a job to pay him but t
hat he is willing to come for halfwages so as to
 learn the business.What is the name of this obl
iging youth asked Sherlock Holmes.His name is Vi
ncent Spaulding, and hes not such a youth, eithe
r. Itshard to say his age. I should not wish a s
marter assistant, Mr. Holmes;and I know very wel
l that he could better himself and earn twice wh
at Iam able to give him. But, after all, if he i
s satisfied, why should Iput ideas in his headWh
y, indeed You seem most fortunate in having an e
mploy who comesunder the full market price. It i
s not a common experience amongemployers in this
 age. I dont know that your assistant is not asr
emarkable as your advertisement.Oh, he has his f
aults, too, said Mr. Wilson. Never was such a fe
llowfor photography. Snapping away with a camera
 when he ought to beimproving his mind, and then
 diving down into the cellar like a rabbitinto i
ts hole to develop his pictures. That is his mai
n fault, but onthe whole hes a good worker. Ther
es no vice in him.He is still with you, I presum
eYes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a
 bit of simple cookingand keeps the place clean-
thats all I have in the house, for I am awidower
 and never had any family. We live very quietly,
 sir, the threeof us; and we keep a roof over ou
r heads and pay our debts, if we donothing more.
The first thing that put us out was that adverti
sement. Spaulding, hecame down into the office j
ust this day eight weeks, with this verypaper in
 his hand, and he saysI wish to the Lord, Mr. Wi
lson, that I was a red-headed man.Why that I ask
s.Why, says he, heres another vacancy on the Lea
gue of theRed-headed Men. Its worth quite a litt
le fortune to any man who getsit, and I understa
nd that there are more vacancies than there are 
men,so that the trustees are at their wits end w
hat to do with the money.If my hair would only c
hange colour, heres a nice little crib allready 
for me to step into.Why, what is it, then I aske
d. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a verystay-at-home 
man, and as my business came to me instead of my
 having togo to it, I was often weeks on end wit
hout putting my foot over thedoor-mat. In that w
ay I didnt know much of what was going on outsid
e,and I was always glad of a bit of news.Have yo
u never heard of the League of the Red-headed Me
n he askedwith his eyes open.Never.Why, I wonder
 at that, for you are eligible yourself for one 
of thevacancies.And what are they worth I asked.
Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the w
ork is slight, and itneed not interfere very muc
h with ones other occupations.Well, you can easi
ly think that that made me prick up my ears, for
 thebusiness has not been over good for some yea
rs, and an extra couple ofhundred would have bee
n very handy.Tell me all about it, said I.Well, 
said he, showing me the advertisement, you can s
ee foryourself that the League has a vacancy, an
d there is the address whereyou should apply for
 particulars. As far as I can make out, the Leag
uewas founded by an American millionaire, Ezekia
h Hopkins, who was verypeculiar in his ways. He 
was himself red-headed, and he had a greatsympat
hy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it 
was found that hehad left his enormous fortune i
n the hands of trustees, withinstructions to app
ly the interest to the providing of easy berths 
tomen whose hair is of that colour. From all I h
ear it is splendid payand very little to do.But,
 said I, there would be millions of red-headed m
en who wouldapply.Not so many as you might think
, he answered. You see it is reallyconfined to L
ondoners, and to grown men. This American had st
arted fromLondon when he was young, and he wante
d to do the old town a good turn.Then, again, I 
have heard it is no use your applying if your ha
ir islight red, or dark red, or anything but rea
l bright, blazing, fieryred. Now, if you cared t
o apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;but 
perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to p
ut yourself out ofthe way for the sake of a few 
hundred pounds.Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as 
you may see for yourselves, that myhair is of a 
very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me
 that ifthere was to be any competition in the m
atter I stood as good a chanceas any man that I 
had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know s
omuch about it that I thought he might prove use
ful, so I just orderedhim to put up the shutters
 for the day and to come right away with me.He w
as very willing to have a holiday, so we shut th
e business up andstarted off for the address tha
t was given us in the advertisement.I never hope
 to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. 
Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who h
ad a shade of red in hishair had tramped into th
e city to answer the advertisement. FleetStreet 
was choked with red-headed folk, and Popes Court
 looked like acosters orange barrow. I should no
t have thought there were so many inthe whole co
untry as were brought together by that singleadv
ertisement. Every shade of colour they were-stra
w, lemon, orange,brick, Irish-setter, liver, cla
y; but, as Spaulding said, there werenot many wh
o had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I
 saw howmany were waiting, I would have given it
 up in despair; but Spauldingwould not hear of i
t. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pus
hedand pulled and butted until he got me through
 the crowd, and right upto the steps which led t
o the office. There was a double stream uponthe 
stair, some going up in hope, and some coming ba
ck dejected; but wewedged in as well as we could
 and soon found ourselves in the office.Your exp
erience has been a most entertaining one, remark
ed Holmes ashis client paused and refreshed his 
memory with a huge pinch of snuff.Pray continue 
your very interesting statement.There was nothin
g in the office but a couple of wooden chairs an
d adeal table, behind which sat a small man with
 a head that was evenredder than mine. He said a
 few words to each candidate as he came up,and t
hen he always managed to find some fault in them
 which woulddisqualify them. Getting a vacancy d
id not seem to be such a very easymatter, after 
all. However, when our turn came the little man 
was muchmore favourable to me than to any of the
 others, and he closed the dooras we entered, so
 that he might have a private word with us.This 
is Mr. Jabez Wilson, said my assistant, and he i
s willing tofill a vacancy in the League.And he 
is admirably suited for it, the other answered. 
He has everyrequirement. I cannot recall when I 
have seen anything so fine. Hetook a step backwa
rd, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my
 hairuntil I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly h
e plunged forward, wrung myhand, and congratulat
ed me warmly on my success.It would be injustice
 to hesitate, said he. You will, however, I amsu
re, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution. 
With that he seizedmy hair in both his hands, an
d tugged until I yelled with the pain.There is w
ater in your eyes, said he as he released me. I 
perceivethat all is as it should be. But we have
 to be careful, for we havetwice been deceived b
y wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales
of cobblers wax which would disgust you with hum
an nature. He steppedover to the window and shou
ted through it at the top of his voice thatthe v
acancy was filled. A groan of disappointment cam
e up from below,and the folk all trooped away in
 different directions until there wasnot a red-h
ead to be seen except my own and that of the man
ager.My name, said he, is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I
 am myself one of thepensioners upon the fund le
ft by our noble benefactor. Are you amarried man
, Mr. Wilson Have you a familyI answered that I 
had not.His face fell immediately.Dear me he sai
d gravely, that is very serious indeed I am sorr
yto hear you say that. The fund was, of course, 
for the propagation andspread of the red-heads a
s well as for their maintenance. It isexceedingl
y unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.My f
ace lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I though
t that I was notto have the vacancy after all; b
ut after thinking it over for a fewminutes he sa
id that it would be all right.In the case of ano
ther, said he, the objection might be fatal, but
we must stretch a point in favour of a man with 
such a head of hair asyours. When shall you be a
ble to enter upon your new dutiesWell, it is a l
ittle awkward, for I have a business already, sa
id I.Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson said 
Vincent Spaulding. Ishould be able to look after
 that for you.What would be the hours I asked.Te
n to two.Now a pawnbrokers business is mostly do
ne of an evening, Mr. Holmes,especially Thursday
 and Friday evening, which is just before pay-da
y;so it would suit me very well to earn a little
 in the mornings.Besides, I knew that my assista
nt was a good man, and that he would seeto anyth
ing that turned up.That would suit me very well,
 said I. And the payIs  4 a week.And the workIs 
purely nominal.What do you call purely nominalWe
ll, you have to be in the office, or at least in
 the building, thewhole time. If you leave, you 
forfeit your whole position forever. Thewill is 
very clear upon that point. You dont comply with
 theconditions if you budge from the office duri
ng that time.Its only four hours a day, and I sh
ould not think of leaving, saidI.No excuse will 
avail, said Mr. Duncan Ross; neither sickness no
rbusiness nor anything else. There you must stay
, or you lose yourbillet.And the workIs to copy 
out the Encyclopaedia Britannica. There is the f
irstvolume of it in that press. You must find yo
ur own ink, pens, andblotting-paper, but we prov
ide this table and chair. Will you be readyto-mo
rrowCertainly, I answered.Then, good-bye, Mr. Ja
bez Wilson, and let me congratulate you oncemore
 on the important position which you have been f
ortunate enough togain. He bowed me out of the r
oom and I went home with my assistant,hardly kno
wing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my o
wn goodfortune.Well, I thought over the matter a
ll day, and by evening I was in lowspirits again
; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whol
e affairmust be some great hoax or fraud, though
 what its object might be Icould not imagine. It
 seemed altogether past belief that anyone could
make such a will, or that they would pay such a 
sum for doing anythingso simple as copying out t
he Encyclopaedia Britannica. VincentSpaulding di
d what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I
 hadreasoned myself out of the whole thing. Howe
ver, in the morning Idetermined to have a look a
t it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle ofink, a
nd with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolsca
p paper, Istarted off for Popes Court.Well, to m
y surprise and delight, everything was as right 
as possible.The table was set out ready for me, 
and Mr. Duncan Ross was there tosee that I got f
airly to work. He started me off upon the letter
 A, andthen he left me; but he would drop in fro
m time to time to see that allwas right with me.
 At two oclock he bade me good-day, complimented
 meupon the amount that I had written, and locke
d the door of the officeafter me.This went on da
y after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the man
agercame in and planked down four golden soverei
gns for my weeks work. Itwas the same next week,
 and the same the week after. Every morning Iwas
 there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two
. By degrees Mr.Duncan Ross took to coming in on
ly once of a morning, and then, after atime, he 
did not come in at all. Still, of course, I neve
r dared toleave the room for an instant, for I w
as not sure when he might come,and the billet wa
s such a good one, and suited me so well, that I
 wouldnot risk the loss of it.Eight weeks passed
 away like this, and I had written about Abbots 
andArchery and Armour and Architecture and Attic
a, and hoped withdiligence that I might get on t
o the Bs before very long. It cost mesomething i
n foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a she
lf with mywritings. And then suddenly the whole 
business came to an end.To an endYes, sir. And n
o later than this morning. I went to my work as 
usualat ten oclock, but the door was shut and lo
cked, with a little squareof cardboard hammered 
on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Herei
t is, and you can read for yourself.He held up a
 piece of white cardboard about the size of a sh
eet ofnote-paper. It read in this fashionTHE RED
-HEADED LEAGUE IS DISSOLVED. October 9, 1890.She
rlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announceme
nt and the ruefulface behind it, until the comic
al side of the affair so completelyovertopped ev
ery other consideration that we both burst out i
nto a roarof laughter.I cannot see that there is
 anything very funny, cried our client,flushing 
up to the roots of his flaming head. If you can 
do nothingbetter than laugh at me, I can go else
where.No, no, cried Holmes, shoving him back int
o the chair from which hehad half risen. I reall
y wouldnt miss your case for the world. It ismos
t refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you wil
l excuse my sayingso, something just a little fu
nny about it. Pray what steps did youtake when y
ou found the card upon the doorI was staggered, 
sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at
 theoffices round, but none of them seemed to kn
ow anything about it.Finally, I went to the land
lord, who is an accountant living on theground f
loor, and I asked him if he could tell me what h
ad become ofthe Red-headed League. He said that 
he had never heard of any suchbody. Then I asked
 him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that t
hename was new to him.Well, said I, the gentlema
n at No. 4.What, the red-headed manYes.Oh, said 
he, his name was William Morris. He was a solici
tor andwas using my room as a temporary convenie
nce until his new premiseswere ready. He moved o
ut yesterday.Where could I find himOh, at his ne
w offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 K
ingEdward Street, near St. Pauls.I started off, 
Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it wa
s amanufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no o
ne in it had ever heard ofeither Mr. William Mor
ris or Mr. Duncan Ross.And what did you do then 
asked Holmes.I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, 
and I took the advice of myassistant. But he cou
ld not help me in any way. He could only say tha
tif I waited I should hear by post. But that was
 not quite good enough,Mr. Holmes. I did not wis
h to lose such a place without a struggle, so,as
 I had heard that you were good enough to give a
dvice to poor folkwho were in need of it, I came
 right away to you.And you did very wisely, said
 Holmes. Your case is an exceedinglyremarkable o
ne, and I shall be happy to look into it. From w
hat youhave told me I think that it is possible 
that graver issues hang fromit than might at fir
st sight appear.Grave enough said Mr. Jabez Wils
on. Why, I have lost four pound aweek.As far as 
you are personally concerned, remarked Holmes, I
 do notsee that you have any grievance against t
his extraordinary league. Onthe contrary, you ar
e, as I understand, richer by some  30, to sayno
thing of the minute knowledge which you have gai
ned on every subjectwhich comes under the letter
 A. You have lost nothing by them.No, sir. But I
 want to find out about them, and who they are, 
and whattheir object was in playing this prank-i
f it was a prank-upon me. Itwas a pretty expensi
ve joke for them, for it cost them two and thirt
ypounds.We shall endeavour to clear up these poi
nts for you. And, first, oneor two questions, Mr
. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first call
edyour attention to the advertisement-how long h
ad he been with youAbout a month then.How did he
 comeIn answer to an advertisement.Was he the on
ly applicantNo, I had a dozen.Why did you pick h
imBecause he was handy and would come cheap.At h
alf wages, in fact.Yes.What is he like, this Vin
cent SpauldingSmall, stout-built, very quick in 
his ways, no hair on his face,though hes not sho
rt of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon hi
sforehead.Holmes sat up in his chair in consider
able excitement. I thought asmuch, said he. Have
 you ever observed that his ears are pierced for
earringsYes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had do
ne it for him when he was alad.Hum said Holmes, 
sinking back in deep thought. He is still withyo
uOh, yes, sir; I have only just left him.And has
 your business been attended to in your absenceN
othing to complain of, sir. Theres never very mu
ch to do of amorning.That will do, Mr. Wilson. I
 shall be happy to give you an opinion uponthe s
ubject in the course of a day or two. To-day is 
Saturday, and Ihope that by Monday we may come t
o a conclusion.Well, Watson, said Holmes when ou
r visitor had left us, what do youmake of it all
I make nothing of it, I answered frankly. It is 
a most mysteriousbusiness.As a rule, said Holmes
, the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious
 it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featur
eless crimeswhich are really puzzling, just as a
 commonplace face is the mostdifficult to identi
fy. But I must be prompt over this matter.What a
re you going to do, then I asked.To smoke, he an
swered. It is quite a three pipe problem, and I 
begthat you wont speak to me for fifty minutes. 
He curled himself up inhis chair, with his thin 
knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, andthere h
e sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pi
pe thrusting outlike the bill of some strange bi
rd. I had come to the conclusion thathe had drop
ped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when 
he suddenlysprang out of his chair with the gest
ure of a man who has made up hismind and put his
 pipe down upon the mantelpiece.Sarasate plays a
t the St. Jamess Hall this afternoon, he remarke
d.What do you think, Watson Could your patients 
spare you for a fewhoursI have nothing to do to-
day. My practice is never very absorbing.Then pu
t on your hat and come. I am going through the C
ity first, andwe can have some lunch on the way.
 I observe that there is a good dealof German mu
sic on the programme, which is rather more to my
 taste thanItalian or French. It is introspectiv
e, and I want to introspect. ComealongWe travell
ed by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and 
a short walktook us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the s
cene of the singular story which wehad listened 
to in the morning. It was a poky, little, shabby
-genteelplace, where four lines of dingy two-sto
ried brick houses looked outinto a small railed-
in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a 
fewclumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fig
ht against a smoke-ladenand uncongenial atmosphe
re. Three gilt balls and a brown board withJABEZ
 WILSON in white letters, upon a corner house, a
nnounced theplace where our red-headed client ca
rried on his business. SherlockHolmes stopped in
 front of it with his head on one side and looke
d itall over, with his eyes shining brightly bet
ween puckered lids. Then hewalked slowly up the 
street, and then down again to the corner, still
looking keenly at the houses. Finally he returne
d to the pawnbrokers,and, having thumped vigorou
sly upon the pavement with his stick two orthree
 times, he went up to the door and knocked. It w
as instantlyopened by a bright-looking, clean-sh
aven young fellow, who asked him tostep in.Thank
 you, said Holmes, I only wished to ask you how 
you would gofrom here to the Strand.Third right,
 fourth left, answered the assistant promptly, c
losingthe door.Smart fellow, that, observed Holm
es as we walked away. He is, in myjudgment, the 
fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I 
am notsure that he has not a claim to be third. 
I have known something of himbefore.Evidently, s
aid I, Mr. Wilsons assistant counts for a good d
eal inthis mystery of the Red-headed League. I a
m sure that you inquired yourway merely in order
 that you might see him.Not him.What thenThe kne
es of his trousers.And what did you seeWhat I ex
pected to see.Why did you beat the pavementMy de
ar doctor, this is a time for observation, not f
or talk. We arespies in an enemys country. We kn
ow something of Saxe-Coburg Square.Let us now ex
plore the parts which lie behind it.The road in 
which we found ourselves as we turned round the 
corner fromthe retired Saxe-Coburg Square presen
ted as great a contrast to it asthe front of a p
icture does to the back. It was one of the maina
rteries which conveyed the traffic of the City t
o the north and west.The roadway was blocked wit
h the immense stream of commerce flowing ina dou
ble tide inward and outward, while the footpaths
 were black withthe hurrying swarm of pedestrian
s. It was difficult to realise as welooked at th
e line of fine shops and stately business premis
es thatthey really abutted on the other side upo
n the faded and stagnantsquare which we had just
 quitted.Let me see, said Holmes, standing at th
e corner and glancing alongthe line, I should li
ke just to remember the order of the houses here
.It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledg
e of London. There isMortimers, the tobacconist,
 the little newspaper shop, the Coburgbranch of 
the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Resta
urant, andMcFarlanes carriage-building depot. Th
at carries us right on to theother block. And no
w, Doctor, weve done our work, so its time we ha
dsome play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and 
then off to violin-land,where all is sweetness a
nd delicacy and harmony, and there are nored-hea
ded clients to vex us with their conundrums.My f
riend was an enthusiastic musician, being himsel
f not only a verycapable performer but a compose
r of no ordinary merit. All theafternoon he sat 
in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happin
ess,gently waving his long, thin fingers in time
 to the music, while hisgently smiling face and 
his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike thoseof 
Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, 
keen-witted,ready-handed criminal agent, as it w
as possible to conceive. In hissingular characte
r the dual nature alternately asserted itself, a
nd hisextreme exactness and astuteness represent
ed, as I have often thought,the reaction against
 the poetic and contemplative mood whichoccasion
ally predominated in him. The swing of his natur
e took him fromextreme languor to devouring ener
gy; and, as I knew well, he was neverso truly fo
rmidable as when, for days on end, he had been l
ounging inhis armchair amid his improvisations a
nd his black-letter editions.Then it was that th
e lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him
,and that his brilliant reasoning power would ri
se to the level ofintuition, until those who wer
e unacquainted with his methods wouldlook askanc
e at him as on a man whose knowledge was not tha
t of othermortals. When I saw him that afternoon
 so enwrapped in the music at St.Jamess Hall I f
elt that an evil time might be coming upon those
 whomhe had set himself to hunt down.You want to
 go home, no doubt, Doctor, he remarked as we em
erged.Yes, it would be as well.And I have some b
usiness to do which will take some hours. Thisbu
siness at Coburg Square is serious.Why seriousA 
considerable crime is in contemplation. I have e
very reason tobelieve that we shall be in time t
o stop it. But to-day being Saturdayrather compl
icates matters. I shall want your help to-night.
At what timeTen will be early enough.I shall be 
at Baker Street at ten.Very well. And, I say, Do
ctor, there may be some little danger, sokindly 
put your army revolver in your pocket. He waved 
his hand,turned on his heel, and disappeared in 
an instant among the crowd.I trust that I am not
 more dense than my neighbours, but I was always
oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my
 dealings with SherlockHolmes. Here I had heard 
what he had heard, I had seen what he hadseen, a
nd yet from his words it was evident that he saw
 clearly notonly what had happened but what was 
about to happen, while to me thewhole business w
as still confused and grotesque. As I drove home
 to myhouse in Kensington I thought over it all,
 from the extraordinary storyof the red-headed c
opier of the Encyclopaedia down to the visit toS
axe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with wh
ich he had parted fromme. What was this nocturna
l expedition, and why should I go armedWhere wer
e we going, and what were we to do I had the hin
t from Holmesthat this smooth-faced pawnbrokers 
assistant was a formidable man-aman who might pl
ay a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but ga
ve itup in despair and set the matter aside unti
l night should bring anexplanation.It was a quar
ter-past nine when I started from home and made 
my wayacross the Park, and so through Oxford Str
eet to Baker Street. Twohansoms were standing at
 the door, and as I entered the passage I heardt
he sound of voices from above. On entering his r
oom, I found Holmes inanimated conversation with
 two men, one of whom I recognised as PeterJones
, the official police agent, while the other was
 a long, thin,sad-faced man, with a very shiny h
at and oppressively respectablefrock-coat.Ha Our
 party is complete, said Holmes, buttoning up hi
s pea-jacketand taking his heavy hunting crop fr
om the rack. Watson, I think youknow Mr. Jones, 
of Scotland Yard Let me introduce you to Mr.Merr
yweather, who is to be our companion in to-night
s adventure.Were hunting in couples again, Docto
r, you see, said Jones in hisconsequential way. 
Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting 
achase. All he wants is an old dog to help him t
o do the running down.I hope a wild goose may no
t prove to be the end of our chase,observed Mr. 
Merryweather gloomily.You may place considerable
 confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir, said thepolice a
gent loftily. He has his own little methods, whi
ch are, if hewont mind my saying so, just a litt
le too theoretical and fantastic,but he has the 
makings of a detective in him. It is not too muc
h to saythat once or twice, as in that business 
of the Sholto murder and theAgra treasure, he ha
s been more nearly correct than the officialforc
e.Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,
 said the stranger withdeference. Still, I confe
ss that I miss my rubber. It is the firstSaturda
y night for seven-and-twenty years that I have n
ot had myrubber.I think you will find, said Sher
lock Holmes, that you will play fora higher stak
e to-night than you have ever done yet, and that
 the playwill be more exciting. For you, Mr. Mer
ryweather, the stake will besome  30,000; and fo
r you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom youwi
sh to lay your hands.John Clay, the murderer, th
ief, smasher, and forger. Hes a young man,Mr. Me
rryweather, but he is at the head of his profess
ion, and I wouldrather have my bracelets on him 
than on any criminal in London. Hes aremarkable 
man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a r
oyal duke,and he himself has been to Eton and Ox
ford. His brain is as cunning ashis fingers, and
 though we meet signs of him at every turn, we n
everknow where to find the man himself. Hell cra
ck a crib in Scotland oneweek, and be raising mo
ney to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.I
ve been on his track for years and have never se
t eyes on him yet.I hope that I may have the ple
asure of introducing you to-night. Ivehad one or
 two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I
 agree withyou that he is at the head of his pro
fession. It is past ten, however,and quite time 
that we started. If you two will take the first 
hansom,Watson and I will follow in the second.Sh
erlock Holmes was not very communicative during 
the long drive andlay back in the cab humming th
e tunes which he had heard in theafternoon. We r
attled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit s
treetsuntil we emerged into Farrington Street.We
 are close there now, my friend remarked. This f
ellow Merryweatheris a bank director, and person
ally interested in the matter. I thoughtit as we
ll to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad f
ellow, thoughan absolute imbecile in his profess
ion. He has one positive virtue. Heis as brave a
s a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he 
gets hisclaws upon anyone. Here we are, and they
 are waiting for us.We had reached the same crow
ded thoroughfare in which we had foundourselves 
in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, fo
llowing theguidance of Mr. Merryweather, we pass
ed down a narrow passage andthrough a side door,
 which he opened for us. Within there was a smal
lcorridor, which ended in a very massive iron ga
te. This also wasopened, and led down a flight o
f winding stone steps, which terminatedat anothe
r formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to l
ight alantern, and then conducted us down a dark
, earth-smelling passage, andso, after opening a
 third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which 
waspiled all round with crates and massive boxes
.You are not very vulnerable from above, Holmes 
remarked as he held upthe lantern and gazed abou
t him.Nor from below, said Mr. Merryweather, str
iking his stick upon theflags which lined the fl
oor. Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow herema
rked, looking up in surprise.I must really ask y
ou to be a little more quiet said Holmesseverely
. You have already imperilled the whole success 
of ourexpedition. Might I beg that you would hav
e the goodness to sit downupon one of those boxe
s, and not to interfereThe solemn Mr. Merryweath
er perched himself upon a crate, with a veryinju
red expression upon his face, while Holmes fell 
upon his knees uponthe floor and, with the lante
rn and a magnifying lens, began to examineminute
ly the cracks between the stones. A few seconds 
sufficed tosatisfy him, for he sprang to his fee
t again and put his glass in hispocket.We have a
t least an hour before us, he remarked, for they
 can hardlytake any steps until the good pawnbro
ker is safely in bed. Then theywill not lose a m
inute, for the sooner they do their work the lon
gertime they will have for their escape. We are 
at present, Doctor-as nodoubt you have divined-i
n the cellar of the City branch of one of thepri
ncipal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the cha
irman of directors,and he will explain to you th
at there are reasons why the more daringcriminal
s of London should take a considerable interest 
in this cellarat present.It is our French gold, 
whispered the director. We have had severalwarni
ngs that an attempt might be made upon it.Your F
rench goldYes. We had occasion some months ago t
o strengthen our resources andborrowed for that 
purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France
. Ithas become known that we have never had occa
sion to unpack the money,and that it is still ly
ing in our cellar. The crate upon which I sitcon
tains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of l
ead foil. Ourreserve of bullion is much larger a
t present than is usually kept in asingle branch
 office, and the directors have had misgivings u
pon thesubject.Which were very well justified, o
bserved Holmes. And now it is timethat we arrang
ed our little plans. I expect that within an hou
r matterswill come to a head. In the meantime Mr
. Merryweather, we must put thescreen over that 
dark lantern.And sit in the darkI am afraid so. 
I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and 
Ithought that, as we were a partie carre, you mi
ght have your rubberafter all. But I see that th
e enemys preparations have gone so farthat we ca
nnot risk the presence of a light. And, first of
 all, we mustchoose our positions. These are dar
ing men, and though we shall takethem at a disad
vantage, they may do us some harm unless we are 
careful.I shall stand behind this crate, and do 
you conceal yourselves behindthose. Then, when I
 flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If t
heyfire, Watson, have no compunction about shoot
ing them down.I placed my revolver, cocked, upon
 the top of the wooden case behindwhich I crouch
ed. Holmes shot the slide across the front of hi
s lanternand left us in pitch darkness-such an a
bsolute darkness as I have neverbefore experienc
ed. The smell of hot metal remained to assure us
 thatthe light was still there, ready to flash o
ut at a moments notice. Tome, with my nerves wor
ked up to a pitch of expectancy, there wassometh
ing depressing and subduing in the sudden gloom,
 and in the colddank air of the vault.They have 
but one retreat, whispered Holmes. That is back 
throughthe house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope
 that you have done what Iasked you, JonesI have
 an inspector and two officers waiting at the fr
ont door.Then we have stopped all the holes. And
 now we must be silent andwait.What a time it se
emed From comparing notes afterwards it was but 
anhour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that
 the night must havealmost gone, and the dawn be
 breaking above us. My limbs were weary andstiff
, for I feared to change my position; yet my ner
ves were worked upto the highest pitch of tensio
n, and my hearing was so acute that Icould not o
nly hear the gentle breathing of my companions, 
but I coulddistinguish the deeper, heavier in-br
eath of the bulky Jones from thethin, sighing no
te of the bank director. From my position I coul
d lookover the case in the direction of the floo
r. Suddenly my eyes caughtthe glint of a light.A
t first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone 
pavement. Then itlengthened out until it became 
a yellow line, and then, without anywarning or s
ound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared,
 a white,almost womanly hand, which felt about i
n the centre of the little areaof light. For a m
inute or more the hand, with its writhing finger
s,protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdr
awn as suddenly as itappeared, and all was dark 
again save the single lurid spark whichmarked a 
chink between the stones.Its disappearance, howe
ver, was but momentary. With a rending, tearings
ound, one of the broad, white stones turned over
 upon its side andleft a square, gaping hole, th
rough which streamed the light of alantern. Over
 the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face,
 whichlooked keenly about it, and then, with a h
and on either side of theaperture, drew itself s
houlder-high and waist-high, until one kneereste
d upon the edge. In another instant he stood at 
the side of thehole and was hauling after him a 
companion, lithe and small likehimself, with a p
ale face and a shock of very red hair.Its all cl
ear, he whispered. Have you the chisel and the b
agsGreat Scott Jump, Archie, jump, and Ill swing
 for itSherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized
 the intruder by the collar.The other dived down
 the hole, and I heard the sound of rending clot
has Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flas
hed upon the barrel of arevolver, but Holmes hun
ting crop came down on the mans wrist, andthe pi
stol clinked upon the stone floor.Its no use, Jo
hn Clay, said Holmes blandly. You have no chance
 atall.So I see, the other answered with the utm
ost coolness. I fancy thatmy pal is all right, t
hough I see you have got his coat-tails.There ar
e three men waiting for him at the door, said Ho
lmes.Oh, indeed You seem to have done the thing 
very completely. I mustcompliment you.And I you,
 Holmes answered. Your red-headed idea was very 
new andeffective.Youll see your pal again presen
tly, said Jones. Hes quicker atclimbing down hol
es than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derb
ies.I beg that you will not touch me with your f
ilthy hands, remarked ourprisoner as the handcuf
fs clattered upon his wrists. You may not beawar
e that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the 
goodness, also,when you address me always to say
 sir and please.All right, said Jones with a sta
re and a snigger. Well, would youplease, sir, ma
rch upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry yo
urHighness to the police-stationThat is better, 
said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow 
tothe three of us and walked quietly off in the 
custody of the detective.Really, Mr. Holmes, sai
d Mr. Merryweather as we followed them fromthe c
ellar, I do not know how the bank can thank you 
or repay you.There is no doubt that you have det
ected and defeated in the mostcomplete manner on
e of the most determined attempts at bank robber
ythat have ever come within my experience.I have
 had one or two little scores of my own to settl
e with Mr. JohnClay, said Holmes. I have been at
 some small expense over thismatter, which I sha
ll expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I 
amamply repaid by having had an experience which
 is in many ways unique,and by hearing the very 
remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League.Yo
u see, Watson, he explained in the early hours o
f the morning as wesat over a glass of whisky an
d soda in Baker Street, it was perfectlyobvious 
from the first that the only possible object of 
this ratherfantastic business of the advertiseme
nt of the League, and the copyingof the Encyclop
aedia, must be to get this not over-bright pawnb
rokerout of the way for a number of hours every 
day. It was a curious way ofmanaging it, but, re
ally, it would be difficult to suggest a better.
The method was no doubt suggested to Clays ingen
ious mind by thecolour of his accomplices hair. 
The  4 a week was a lure which mustdraw him, and
 what was it to them, who were playing for thous
ands Theyput in the advertisement, one rogue has
 the temporary office, the otherrogue incites th
e man to apply for it, and together they manage 
tosecure his absence every morning in the week. 
From the time that Iheard of the assistant havin
g come for half wages, it was obvious to methat 
he had some strong motive for securing the situa
tion.But how could you guess what the motive was
Had there been women in the house, I should have
 suspected a merevulgar intrigue. That, however,
 was out of the question. The mansbusiness was a
 small one, and there was nothing in his house w
hichcould account for such elaborate preparation
s, and such an expenditureas they were at. It mu
st, then, be something out of the house. Whatcou
ld it be I thought of the assistants fondness fo
r photography, andhis trick of vanishing into th
e cellar. The cellar There was the endof this ta
ngled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mys
teriousassistant and found that I had to deal wi
th one of the coolest and mostdaring criminals i
n London. He was doing something in thecellar-so
mething which took many hours a day for months o
n end. Whatcould it be, once more I could think 
of nothing save that he wasrunning a tunnel to s
ome other building.So far I had got when we went
 to visit the scene of action. Isurprised you by
 beating upon the pavement with my stick. I wasa
scertaining whether the cellar stretched out in 
front or behind. Itwas not in front. Then I rang
 the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistantanswere
d it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had ne
ver set eyesupon each other before. I hardly loo
ked at his face. His knees werewhat I wished to 
see. You must yourself have remarked how worn,wr
inkled, and stained they were. They spoke of tho
se hours ofburrowing. The only remaining point w
as what they were burrowing for. Iwalked round t
he corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutte
d on ourfriends premises, and felt that I had so
lved my problem. When youdrove home after the co
ncert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon thech
airman of the bank directors, with the result th
at you have seen.And how could you tell that the
y would make their attempt to-night Iasked.Well,
 when they closed their League offices that was 
a sign that theycared no longer about Mr. Jabez 
Wilsons presence-in other words, thatthey had co
mpleted their tunnel. But it was essential that 
they shoulduse it soon, as it might be discovere
d, or the bullion might beremoved. Saturday woul
d suit them better than any other day, as itwoul
d give them two days for their escape. For all t
hese reasons Iexpected them to come to-night.You
 reasoned it out beautifully, I exclaimed in unf
eigned admiration.It is so long a chain, and yet
 every link rings true.It saved me from ennui, h
e answered, yawning. Alas I already feelit closi
ng in upon me. My life is spent in one long effo
rt to escapefrom the commonplaces of existence. 
These little problems help me to doso.And you ar
e a benefactor of the race, said I.He shrugged h
is shoulders. Well, perhaps, after all, it is of
 somelittle use, he remarked. Lhomme cest rien-l
oeuvre cest tout,as Gustave Flaubert wrote to Ge
orge Sand.III. A CASE OF IDENTITYMy dear fellow,
 said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side o
f thefire in his lodgings at Baker Street, life 
is infinitely stranger thananything which the mi
nd of man could invent. We would not dare toconc
eive the things which are really mere commonplac
es of existence. Ifwe could fly out of that wind
ow hand in hand, hover over this greatcity, gent
ly remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer th
ings whichare going on, the strange coincidences
, the plannings, thecross-purposes, the wonderfu
l chains of events, working throughgenerations, 
and leading to the most outr results, it would m
ake allfiction with its conventionalities and fo
reseen conclusions most staleand unprofitable.An
d yet I am not convinced of it, I answered. The 
cases which cometo light in the papers are, as a
 rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough.We have in
 our police reports realism pushed to its extrem
e limits, andyet the result is, it must be confe
ssed, neither fascinating norartistic.A certain 
selection and discretion must be used in produci
ng arealistic effect, remarked Holmes. This is w
anting in the policereport, where more stress is
 laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of themagist
rate than upon the details, which to an observer
 contain thevital essence of the whole matter. D
epend upon it, there is nothing sounnatural as t
he commonplace.I smiled and shook my head. I can
 quite understand your thinking so,I said. Of co
urse, in your position of unofficial adviser and
 helperto everybody who is absolutely puzzled, t
hroughout three continents,you are brought in co
ntact with all that is strange and bizarre. Buth
ere-I picked up the morning paper from the groun
d-let us put it to apractical test. Here is the 
first heading upon which I come. Ahusbands cruel
ty to his wife. There is half a column of print,
 but Iknow without reading it that it is all per
fectly familiar to me. Thereis, of course, the o
ther woman, the drink, the push, the blow, thebr
uise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The cr
udest of writerscould invent nothing more crude.
Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for y
our argument, saidHolmes, taking the paper and g
lancing his eye down it. This is theDundas separ
ation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in
 clearingup some small points in connection with
 it. The husband was ateetotaler, there was no o
ther woman, and the conduct complained of wastha
t he had drifted into the habit of winding up ev
ery meal by takingout his false teeth and hurlin
g them at his wife, which, you willallow, is not
 an action likely to occur to the imagination of
 theaverage story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff,
 Doctor, and acknowledgethat I have scored over 
you in your example.He held out his snuffbox of 
old gold, with a great amethyst in thecentre of 
the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to h
is homelyways and simple life that I could not h
elp commenting upon it.Ah, said he, I forgot tha
t I had not seen you for some weeks. It isa litt
le souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return f
or my assistancein the case of the Irene Adler p
apers.And the ring I asked, glancing at a remark
able brilliant whichsparkled upon his finger.It 
was from the reigning family of Holland, though 
the matter in whichI served them was of such del
icacy that I cannot confide it even toyou, who h
ave been good enough to chronicle one or two of 
my littleproblems.And have you any on hand just 
now I asked with interest.Some ten or twelve, bu
t none which present any feature of interest.The
y are important, you understand, without being i
nteresting. Indeed,I have found that it is usual
ly in unimportant matters that there is afield f
or the observation, and for the quick analysis o
f cause andeffect which gives the charm to an in
vestigation. The larger crimes areapt to be the 
simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvio
us, as arule, is the motive. In these cases, sav
e for one rather intricatematter which has been 
referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing
which presents any features of interest. It is p
ossible, however, thatI may have something bette
r before very many minutes are over, for thisis 
one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.He had 
risen from his chair and was standing between th
e parted blindsgazing down into the dull neutral
-tinted London street. Looking overhis shoulder,
 I saw that on the pavement opposite there stood
 a largewoman with a heavy fur boa round her nec
k, and a large curling redfeather in a broad-bri
mmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish Duches
sof Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under 
this great panoply shepeeped up in a nervous, he
sitating fashion at our windows, while herbody o
scillated backward and forward, and her fingers 
fidgeted with herglove buttons. Suddenly, with a
 plunge, as of the swimmer who leavesthe bank, s
he hurried across the road, and we heard the sha
rp clang ofthe bell.I have seen those symptoms b
efore, said Holmes, throwing hiscigarette into t
he fire. Oscillation upon the pavement always me
ans anaffaire de coeur. She would like advice, b
ut is not sure that thematter is not too delicat
e for communication. And yet even here we maydis
criminate. When a woman has been seriously wrong
ed by a man she nolonger oscillates, and the usu
al symptom is a broken bell wire. Here wemay tak
e it that there is a love matter, but that the m
aiden is not somuch angry as perplexed, or griev
ed. But here she comes in person toresolve our d
oubts.As he spoke there was a tap at the door, a
nd the boy in buttons enteredto announce Miss Ma
ry Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed beh
indhis small black figure like a full-sailed mer
chant-man behind a tinypilot boat. Sherlock Holm
es welcomed her with the easy courtesy forwhich 
he was remarkable, and, having closed the door a
nd bowed her intoan armchair, he looked her over
 in the minute and yet abstractedfashion which w
as peculiar to him.Do you not find, he said, tha
t with your short sight it is a littletrying to 
do so much typewritingI did at first, she answer
ed, but now I know where the letters arewithout 
looking. Then, suddenly realising the full purpo
rt of hiswords, she gave a violent start and loo
ked up, with fear andastonishment upon her broad
, good-humoured face. Youve heard aboutme, Mr. H
olmes, she cried, else how could you know all th
atNever mind, said Holmes, laughing; it is my bu
siness to know things.Perhaps I have trained mys
elf to see what others overlook. If not, whyshou
ld you come to consult meI came to you, sir, bec
ause I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whosehus
band you found so easy when the police and every
one had given him upfor dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I 
wish you would do as much for me. Im notrich, bu
t still I have a hundred a year in my own right,
 besides thelittle that I make by the machine, a
nd I would give it all to know whathas become of
 Mr. Hosmer Angel.Why did you come away to consu
lt me in such a hurry asked SherlockHolmes, with
 his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ce
iling.Again a startled look came over the somewh
at vacuous face of Miss MarySutherland. Yes, I d
id bang out of the house, she said, for it madem
e angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windiba
nk-that is, myfather-took it all. He would not g
o to the police, and he would not goto you, and 
so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on s
aying thatthere was no harm done, it made me mad
, and I just on with my thingsand came right awa
y to you.Your father, said Holmes, your stepfath
er, surely, since the name isdifferent.Yes, my s
tepfather. I call him father, though it sounds f
unny, too,for he is only five years and two mont
hs older than myself.And your mother is aliveOh,
 yes, mother is alive and well. I wasnt best ple
ased, Mr. Holmes,when she married again so soon 
after fathers death, and a man who wasnearly fif
teen years younger than herself. Father was a pl
umber in theTottenham Court Road, and he left a 
tidy business behind him, whichmother carried on
 with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windi
bankcame he made her sell the business, for he w
as very superior, being atraveller in wines. The
y got  4700 for the goodwill and interest,which 
wasnt near as much as father could have got if h
e had beenalive.I had expected to see Sherlock H
olmes impatient under this rambling andinconsequ
ential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had l
istened withthe greatest concentration of attent
ion.Your own little income, he asked, does it co
me out of the businessOh, no, sir. It is quite s
eparate and was left me by my uncle Ned inAuckla
nd. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 per cen
t. Two thousandfive hundred pounds was the amoun
t, but I can only touch the interest.You interes
t me extremely, said Holmes. And since you draw 
so largea sum as a hundred a year, with what you
 earn into the bargain, you nodoubt travel a lit
tle and indulge yourself in every way. I believe
 thata single lady can get on very nicely upon a
n income of about  60.I could do with much less 
than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understandthat as
 long as I live at home I dont wish to be a burd
en to them, andso they have the use of the money
 just while I am staying with them. Ofcourse, th
at is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draw
s my interestevery quarter and pays it over to m
other, and I find that I can dopretty well with 
what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopenc
e asheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twe
nty sheets in a day.You have made your position 
very clear to me, said Holmes. This ismy friend,
 Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely
 as beforemyself. Kindly tell us now all about y
our connection with Mr. HosmerAngel.A flush stol
e over Miss Sutherlands face, and she picked ner
vously atthe fringe of her jacket. I met him fir
st at the gasfitters ball,she said. They used to
 send father tickets when he was alive, and then
afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to 
mother. Mr. Windibankdid not wish us to go. He n
ever did wish us to go anywhere. He wouldget qui
te mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-s
chool treat. Butthis time I was set on going, an
d I would go; for what right had he toprevent He
 said the folk were not fit for us to know, when
 allfathers friends were to be there. And he sai
d that I had nothing fitto wear, when I had my p
urple plush that I had never so much as takenout
 of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would
 do, he went off toFrance upon the business of t
he firm, but we went, mother and I, withMr. Hard
y, who used to be our foreman, and it was there 
I met Mr.Hosmer Angel.I suppose, said Holmes, th
at when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he wa
s very annoyed at your having gone to the ball.O
h, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, 
I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said 
there was no use denying anything to awoman, for
 she would have her way.I see. Then at the gasfi
tters ball you met, as I understand, agentleman 
called Mr. Hosmer Angel.Yes, sir. I met him that
 night, and he called next day to ask if wehad g
ot home all safe, and after that we met him-that
 is to say, Mr.Holmes, I met him twice for walks
, but after that father came backagain, and Mr. 
Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any mor
e.NoWell, you know father didnt like anything of
 the sort. He wouldnthave any visitors if he cou
ld help it, and he used to say that a womanshoul
d be happy in her own family circle. But then, a
s I used to say tomother, a woman wants her own 
circle to begin with, and I had not gotmine yet.
But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel Did he make no at
tempt to see youWell, father was going off to Fr
ance again in a week, and Hosmer wroteand said t
hat it would be safer and better not to see each
 other untilhe had gone. We could write in the m
eantime, and he used to write everyday. I took t
he letters in in the morning, so there was no ne
ed forfather to know.Were you engaged to the gen
tleman at this timeOh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were 
engaged after the first walk that wetook. Hosmer
-Mr. Angel-was a cashier in an office in Leadenh
allStreet-and-What officeThats the worst of it, 
Mr. Holmes, I dont know.Where did he live, thenH
e slept on the premises.And you dont know his ad
dressNo-except that it was Leadenhall Street.Whe
re did you address your letters, thenTo the Lead
enhall Street Post Office, to be left till calle
d for. Hesaid that if they were sent to the offi
ce he would be chaffed by allthe other clerks ab
out having letters from a lady, so I offered tot
ypewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldnt h
ave that, for he saidthat when I wrote them they
 seemed to come from me, but when they weretypew
ritten he always felt that the machine had come 
between us. Thatwill just show you how fond he w
as of me, Mr. Holmes, and the littlethings that 
he would think of.It was most suggestive, said H
olmes. It has long been an axiom ofmine that the
 little things are infinitely the most important
. Can youremember any other little things about 
Mr. Hosmer AngelHe was a very shy man, Mr. Holme
s. He would rather walk with me in theevening th
an in the daylight, for he said that he hated to
 beconspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he
 was. Even his voice wasgentle. Hed had the quin
sy and swollen glands when he was young, hetold 
me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and 
a hesitating,whispering fashion of speech. He wa
s always well dressed, very neat andplain, but h
is eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore
 tintedglasses against the glare.Well, and what 
happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, re
turnedto FranceMr. Hosmer Angel came to the hous
e again and proposed that we shouldmarry before 
father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and
 made meswear, with my hands on the Testament, t
hat whatever happened I wouldalways be true to h
im. Mother said he was quite right to make me sw
ear,and that it was a sign of his passion. Mothe
r was all in his favourfrom the first and was ev
en fonder of him than I was. Then, when theytalk
ed of marrying within the week, I began to ask a
bout father; butthey both said never to mind abo
ut father, but just to tell himafterwards, and m
other said she would make it all right with him.
 Ididnt quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed f
unny that I should askhis leave, as he was only 
a few years older than me; but I didnt wantto do
 anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bo
rdeaux, where thecompany has its French offices,
 but the letter came back to me on thevery morni
ng of the wedding.It missed him, thenYes, sir; f
or he had started to England just before it arri
ved.Ha that was unfortunate. Your wedding was ar
ranged, then, for theFriday. Was it to be in chu
rchYes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at S
t. Saviours, near KingsCross, and we were to hav
e breakfast afterwards at the St. PancrasHotel. 
Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there wer
e two of us heput us both into it and stepped hi
mself into a four-wheeler, whichhappened to be t
he only other cab in the street. We got to the c
hurchfirst, and when the four-wheeler drove up w
e waited for him to stepout, but he never did, a
nd when the cabman got down from the box andlook
ed there was no one there The cabman said that h
e could notimagine what had become of him, for h
e had seen him get in with his owneyes. That was
 last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen 
or heardanything since then to throw any light u
pon what became of him.It seems to me that you h
ave been very shamefully treated, saidHolmes.Oh,
 no, sir He was too good and kind to leave me so
. Why, all themorning he was saying to me that, 
whatever happened, I was to be true;and that eve
n if something quite unforeseen occurred to sepa
rate us, Iwas always to remember that I was pled
ged to him, and that he wouldclaim his pledge so
oner or later. It seemed strange talk for aweddi
ng-morning, but what has happened since gives a 
meaning to it.Most certainly it does. Your own o
pinion is, then, that someunforeseen catastrophe
 has occurred to himYes, sir. I believe that he 
foresaw some danger, or else he would nothave ta
lked so. And then I think that what he foresaw h
appened.But you have no notion as to what it cou
ld have beenNone.One more question. How did your
 mother take the matterShe was angry, and said t
hat I was never to speak of the matteragain.And 
your father Did you tell himYes; and he seemed t
o think, with me, that something had happened, a
ndthat I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said
, what interest couldanyone have in bringing me 
to the doors of the church, and then leavingme N
ow, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had ma
rried me and gotmy money settled on him, there m
ight be some reason, but Hosmer wasvery independ
ent about money and never would look at a shilli
ng ofmine. And yet, what could have happened And
 why could he not writeOh, it drives me half-mad
 to think of it, and I cant sleep a wink atnight
. She pulled a little handkerchief out of her mu
ff and began tosob heavily into it.I shall glanc
e into the case for you, said Holmes, rising, an
d Ihave no doubt that we shall reach some defini
te result. Let the weightof the matter rest upon
 me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon itf
urther. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel v
anish from yourmemory, as he has done from your 
life.Then you dont think Ill see him againI fear
 not.Then what has happened to himYou will leave
 that question in my hands. I should like an acc
uratedescription of him and any letters of his w
hich you can spare.I advertised for him in last 
Saturdays Chronicle, said she. Hereis the slip a
nd here are four letters from him.Thank you. And
 your addressNo. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.Mr. A
ngels address you never had, I understand. Where
 is yourfathers place of businessHe travels for 
Westhouse  Marbank, the great claret importers o
fFenchurch Street.Thank you. You have made your 
statement very clearly. You will leavethe papers
 here, and remember the advice which I have give
n you. Letthe whole incident be a sealed book, a
nd do not allow it to affect yourlife.You are ve
ry kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I sha
ll be trueto Hosmer. He shall find me ready when
 he comes back.For all the preposterous hat and 
the vacuous face, there was somethingnoble in th
e simple faith of our visitor which compelled ou
r respect.She laid her little bundle of papers u
pon the table and went her way,with a promise to
 come again whenever she might be summoned.Sherl
ock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his
 fingertips stillpressed together, his legs stre
tched out in front of him, and his gazedirected 
upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from th
e rack the oldand oily clay pipe, which was to h
im as a counsellor, and, having litit, he leaned
 back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wr
eathsspinning up from him, and a look of infinit
e languor in his face.Quite an interesting study
, that maiden, he observed. I found hermore inte
resting than her little problem, which, by the w
ay, is rathera trite one. You will find parallel
 cases, if you consult my index, inAndover in 77
, and there was something of the sort at The Hag
ue lastyear. Old as is the idea, however, there 
were one or two details whichwere new to me. But
 the maiden herself was most instructive.You app
eared to read a good deal upon her which was qui
te invisible tome, I remarked.Not invisible but 
unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to loo
k,and so you missed all that was important. I ca
n never bring you torealise the importance of sl
eeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,or the 
great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now
, what did yougather from that womans appearance
 Describe it.Well, she had a slate-coloured, bro
ad-brimmed straw hat, with afeather of a brickis
h red. Her jacket was black, with black beads se
wnupon it, and a fringe of little black jet orna
ments. Her dress wasbrown, rather darker than co
ffee colour, with a little purple plush atthe ne
ck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were
 worn through atthe right forefinger. Her boots 
I didnt observe. She had small round,hanging gol
d earrings, and a general air of being fairly we
ll-to-do ina vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way
.Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly togeth
er and chuckled.Pon my word, Watson, you are com
ing along wonderfully. You havereally done very 
well indeed. It is true that you have missedever
ything of importance, but you have hit upon the 
method, and youhave a quick eye for colour. Neve
r trust to general impressions, myboy, but conce
ntrate yourself upon details. My first glance is
 alwaysat a womans sleeve. In a man it is perhap
s better first to take theknee of the trouser. A
s you observe, this woman had plush upon herslee
ves, which is a most useful material for showing
 traces. The doubleline a little above the wrist
, where the typewritist presses againstthe table
, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, o
f the handtype, leaves a similar mark, but only 
on the left arm, and on the sideof it farthest f
rom the thumb, instead of being right across the
broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at he
r face, and, observingthe dint of a pince-nez at
 either side of her nose, I ventured a remarkupo
n short sight and typewriting, which seemed to s
urprise her.It surprised me.But, surely, it was 
obvious. I was then much surprised and intereste
don glancing down to observe that, though the bo
ots which she waswearing were not unlike each ot
her, they were really odd ones; the onehaving a 
slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plai
n one. One wasbuttoned only in the two lower but
tons out of five, and the other atthe first, thi
rd, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young la
dy,otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from 
home with odd boots,half-buttoned, it is no grea
t deduction to say that she came away in ahurry.
And what else I asked, keenly interested, as I a
lways was, by myfriends incisive reasoning.I not
ed, in passing, that she had written a note befo
re leaving homebut after being fully dressed. Yo
u observed that her right glove wastorn at the f
orefinger, but you did not apparently see that b
oth gloveand finger were stained with violet ink
. She had written in a hurry anddipped her pen t
oo deep. It must have been this morning, or the 
markwould not remain clear upon the finger. All 
this is amusing, thoughrather elementary, but I 
must go back to business, Watson. Would youmind 
reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hos
mer AngelI held the little printed slip to the l
ight. Missing, it said, onthe morning of the fou
rteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. Aboutfi
ve ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sall
ow complexion, blackhair, a little bald in the c
entre, bushy, black side-whiskers andmoustache; 
tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was 
dressed,when last seen, in black frock-coat face
d with silk, black waistcoat,gold Albert chain, 
and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaite
rsover elastic-sided boots. Known to have been e
mployed in an office inLeadenhall Street. Anybod
y bringing, c, c.That will do, said Holmes. As t
o the letters, he continued,glancing over them, 
they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in
them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac on
ce. There is oneremarkable point, however, which
 will no doubt strike you.They are typewritten, 
I remarked.Not only that, but the signature is t
ypewritten. Look at the neatlittle Hosmer Angel 
at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but nos
uperscription except Leadenhall Street, which is
 rather vague. Thepoint about the signature is v
ery suggestive-in fact, we may call itconclusive
.Of whatMy dear fellow, is it possible you do no
t see how strongly it bearsupon the caseI cannot
 say that I do unless it were that he wished to 
be able todeny his signature if an action for br
each of promise were instituted.No, that was not
 the point. However, I shall write two letters, 
whichshould settle the matter. One is to a firm 
in the City, the other is tothe young ladys step
father, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he cou
ldmeet us here at six oclock to-morrow evening. 
It is just as well thatwe should do business wit
h the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we cando 
nothing until the answers to those letters come,
 so we may put ourlittle problem upon the shelf 
for the interim.I had had so many reasons to bel
ieve in my friends subtle powers ofreasoning and
 extraordinary energy in action that I felt that
 he musthave some solid grounds for the assured 
and easy demeanour with whichhe treated the sing
ular mystery which he had been called upon tofat
hom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the c
ase of the King ofBohemia and of the Irene Adler
 photograph; but when I looked back tothe weird 
business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordin
arycircumstances connected with the Study in Sca
rlet, I felt that it wouldbe a strange tangle in
deed which he could not unravel.I left him then,
 still puffing at his black clay pipe, with thec
onviction that when I came again on the next eve
ning I would find thathe held in his hands all t
he clues which would lead up to the identityof t
he disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherla
nd.A professional case of great gravity was enga
ging my own attention atthe time, and the whole 
of next day I was busy at the bedside of thesuff
erer. It was not until close upon six oclock tha
t I found myselffree and was able to spring into
 a hansom and drive to Baker Street,half afraid 
that I might be too late to assist at the dnouem
ent ofthe little mystery. I found Sherlock Holme
s alone, however, halfasleep, with his long, thi
n form curled up in the recesses of hisarmchair.
 A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, w
ith thepungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric aci
d, told me that he had spenthis day in the chemi
cal work which was so dear to him.Well, have you
 solved it I asked as I entered.Yes. It was the 
bisulphate of baryta.No, no, the mystery I cried
.Oh, that I thought of the salt that I have been
 working upon. Therewas never any mystery in the
 matter, though, as I said yesterday, someof the
 details are of interest. The only drawback is t
hat there is nolaw, I fear, that can touch the s
coundrel.Who was he, then, and what was his obje
ct in deserting MissSutherlandThe question was h
ardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet op
enedhis lips to reply, when we heard a heavy foo
tfall in the passage and atap at the door.This i
s the girls stepfather, Mr. James Windibank, sai
d Holmes. Hehas written to me to say that he wou
ld be here at six. Come inThe man who entered wa
s a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirtyyear
s of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with
 a bland,insinuating manner, and a pair of wonde
rfully sharp and penetratinggrey eyes. He shot a
 questioning glance at each of us, placed his sh
inytop-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight
 bow sidled down into thenearest chair.Good-even
ing, Mr. James Windibank, said Holmes. I think t
hat thistypewritten letter is from you, in which
 you made an appointment withme for six oclockYe
s, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but
 I am not quite myown master, you know. I am sor
ry that Miss Sutherland has troubled youabout th
is little matter, for I think it is far better n
ot to washlinen of the sort in public. It was qu
ite against my wishes that shecame, but she is a
 very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have
noticed, and she is not easily controlled when s
he has made up her mindon a point. Of course, I 
did not mind you so much, as you are notconnecte
d with the official police, but it is not pleasa
nt to have afamily misfortune like this noised a
broad. Besides, it is a uselessexpense, for how 
could you possibly find this Hosmer AngelOn the 
contrary, said Holmes quietly; I have every reas
on to believethat I will succeed in discovering 
Mr. Hosmer Angel.Mr. Windibank gave a violent st
art and dropped his gloves. I amdelighted to hea
r it, he said.It is a curious thing, remarked Ho
lmes, that a typewriter has reallyquite as much 
individuality as a mans handwriting. Unless they
 arequite new, no two of them write exactly alik
e. Some letters get moreworn than others, and so
me wear only on one side. Now, you remark inthis
 note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every cas
e there is somelittle slurring over of the e, an
d a slight defect in the tail of ther. There are
 fourteen other characteristics, but those are t
he moreobvious.We do all our correspondence with
 this machine at the office, and nodoubt it is a
 little worn, our visitor answered, glancing kee
nly atHolmes with his bright little eyes.And now
 I will show you what is really a very interesti
ng study, Mr.Windibank, Holmes continued. I thin
k of writing another littlemonograph some of the
se days on the typewriter and its relation tocri
me. It is a subject to which I have devoted some
 little attention. Ihave here four letters which
 purport to come from the missing man. Theyare a
ll typewritten. In each case, not only are the e
s slurred andthe rs tailless, but you will obser
ve, if you care to use mymagnifying lens, that t
he fourteen other characteristics to which Ihave
 alluded are there as well.Mr. Windibank sprang 
out of his chair and picked up his hat. I cannot
waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr.
 Holmes, he said. Ifyou can catch the man, catch
 him, and let me know when you have doneit.Certa
inly, said Holmes, stepping over and turning the
 key in thedoor. I let you know, then, that I ha
ve caught himWhat where shouted Mr. Windibank, t
urning white to his lips andglancing about him l
ike a rat in a trap.Oh, it wont do-really it won
t, said Holmes suavely. There is nopossible gett
ing out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too tr
ansparent,and it was a very bad compliment when 
you said that it was impossiblefor me to solve s
o simple a question. Thats right Sit down and le
t ustalk it over.Our visitor collapsed into a ch
air, with a ghastly face and a glitterof moistur
e on his brow. It-its not actionable, he stammer
ed.I am very much afraid that it is not. But bet
ween ourselves,Windibank, it was as cruel and se
lfish and heartless a trick in a pettyway as eve
r came before me. Now, let me just run over the 
course ofevents, and you will contradict me if I
 go wrong.The man sat huddled up in his chair, w
ith his head sunk upon hisbreast, like one who i
s utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up onth
e corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back wi
th his hands in hispockets, began talking, rathe
r to himself, as it seemed, than to us.The man m
arried a woman very much older than himself for 
her money,said he, and he enjoyed the use of the
 money of the daughter as longas she lived with 
them. It was a considerable sum, for people in t
heirposition, and the loss of it would have made
 a serious difference. Itwas worth an effort to 
preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiable
disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted i
n her ways, so that itwas evident that with her 
fair personal advantages, and her littleincome, 
she would not be allowed to remain single long. 
Now hermarriage would mean, of course, the loss 
of a hundred a year, so whatdoes her stepfather 
do to prevent it He takes the obvious course ofk
eeping her at home and forbidding her to seek th
e company of people ofher own age. But soon he f
ound that that would not answer forever. Shebeca
me restive, insisted upon her rights, and finall
y announced herpositive intention of going to a 
certain ball. What does her cleverstepfather do 
then He conceives an idea more creditable to his
 headthan to his heart. With the connivance and 
assistance of his wife hedisguised himself, cove
red those keen eyes with tinted glasses, maskedt
he face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whi
skers, sunk that clearvoice into an insinuating 
whisper, and doubly secure on account of thegirl
s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, a
nd keeps off otherlovers by making love himself.
It was only a joke at first, groaned our visitor
. We never thoughtthat she would have been so ca
rried away.Very likely not. However that may be,
 the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, 
and, having quite made up her mind that herstepf
ather was in France, the suspicion of treachery 
never for aninstant entered her mind. She was fl
attered by the gentlemansattentions, and the eff
ect was increased by the loudly expressedadmirat
ion of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call,
 for it wasobvious that the matter should be pus
hed as far as it would go if areal effect were t
o be produced. There were meetings, and anengage
ment, which would finally secure the girls affec
tions fromturning towards anyone else. But the d
eception could not be kept upforever. These pret
ended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. T
hething to do was clearly to bring the business 
to an end in such adramatic manner that it would
 leave a permanent impression upon theyoung lady
s mind and prevent her from looking upon any oth
er suitorfor some time to come. Hence those vows
 of fidelity exacted upon aTestament, and hence 
also the allusions to a possibility of something
happening on the very morning of the wedding. Ja
mes Windibank wishedMiss Sutherland to be so bou
nd to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as tohis fa
te, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she
 would not listento another man. As far as the c
hurch door he brought her, and then, ashe could 
go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by 
the old trickof stepping in at one door of a fou
r-wheeler and out at the other. Ithink that was 
the chain of events, Mr. WindibankOur visitor ha
d recovered something of his assurance while Hol
mes hadbeen talking, and he rose from his chair 
now with a cold sneer upon hispale face.It may b
e so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes, said he, but if
 you are sovery sharp you ought to be sharp enou
gh to know that it is you who arebreaking the la
w now, and not me. I have done nothing actionabl
e fromthe first, but as long as you keep that do
or locked you lay yourselfopen to an action for 
assault and illegal constraint.The law cannot, a
s you say, touch you, said Holmes, unlocking and
throwing open the door, yet there never was a ma
n who deservedpunishment more. If the young lady
 has a brother or a friend, he oughtto lay a whi
p across your shoulders. By Jove he continued, f
lushingup at the sight of the bitter sneer upon 
the mans face, it is notpart of my duties to my 
client, but heres a hunting crop handy, and Ithi
nk I shall just treat myself to- He took two swi
ft steps to thewhip, but before he could grasp i
t there was a wild clatter of stepsupon the stai
rs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the win
dow wecould see Mr. James Windibank running at t
he top of his speed down theroad.Theres a cold-b
looded scoundrel said Holmes, laughing, as he th
rewhimself down into his chair once more. That f
ellow will rise fromcrime to crime until he does
 something very bad, and ends on a gallows.The c
ase has, in some respects, been not entirely dev
oid of interest.I cannot now entirely see all th
e steps of your reasoning, Iremarked.Well, of co
urse it was obvious from the first that this Mr.
 HosmerAngel must have some strong object for hi
s curious conduct, and it wasequally clear that 
the only man who really profited by the incident
, asfar as we could see, was the stepfather. The
n the fact that the two menwere never together, 
but that the one always appeared when the otherw
as away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spec
tacles and the curiousvoice, which both hinted a
t a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. Mysuspi
cions were all confirmed by his peculiar action 
in typewriting hissignature, which, of course, i
nferred that his handwriting was sofamiliar to h
er that she would recognise even the smallest sa
mple ofit. You see all these isolated facts, tog
ether with many minor ones,all pointed in the sa
me direction.And how did you verify themHaving o
nce spotted my man, it was easy to get corrobora
tion. I knewthe firm for which this man worked. 
Having taken the printeddescription. I eliminate
d everything from it which could be the resultof
 a disguise-the whiskers, the glasses, the voice
, and I sent it tothe firm, with a request that 
they would inform me whether it answeredto the d
escription of any of their travellers. I had alr
eady noticedthe peculiarities of the typewriter,
 and I wrote to the man himself athis business a
ddress asking him if he would come here. As I ex
pected,his reply was typewritten and revealed th
e same trivial butcharacteristic defects. The sa
me post brought me a letter fromWesthouse  Marba
nk, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the descrip
tiontallied in every respect with that of their 
employ, James Windibank.Voil toutAnd Miss Suther
landIf I tell her she will not believe me. You m
ay remember the oldPersian saying, There is dang
er for him who taketh the tiger cub, anddanger a
lso for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman. 
There is asmuch sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and
 as much knowledge of the world.IV. THE BOSCOMBE
 VALLEY MYSTERYWe were seated at breakfast one m
orning, my wife and I, when the maidbrought in a
 telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran i
n this wayHave you a couple of days to spare Hav
e just been wired for from thewest of England in
 connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall 
beglad if you will come with me. Air and scenery
 perfect. LeavePaddington by the 1115.What do yo
u say, dear said my wife, looking across at me. 
Will yougoI really dont know what to say. I have
 a fairly long list atpresent.Oh, Anstruther wou
ld do your work for you. You have been looking a
little pale lately. I think that the change woul
d do you good, and youare always so interested i
n Mr. Sherlock Holmes cases.I should be ungratef
ul if I were not, seeing what I gained through o
neof them, I answered. But if I am to go, I must
 pack at once, for Ihave only half an hour.My ex
perience of camp life in Afghanistan had at leas
t had the effectof making me a prompt and ready 
traveller. My wants were few andsimple, so that 
in less than the time stated I was in a cab with
 myvalise, rattling away to Paddington Station. 
Sherlock Holmes was pacingup and down the platfo
rm, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and
taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and clo
se-fitting cloth cap.It is really very good of y
ou to come, Watson, said he. It makes aconsidera
ble difference to me, having someone with me on 
whom I canthoroughly rely. Local aid is always e
ither worthless or else biassed.If you will keep
 the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.We
 had the carriage to ourselves save for an immen
se litter of paperswhich Holmes had brought with
 him. Among these he rummaged and read,with inte
rvals of note-taking and of meditation, until we
 were pastReading. Then he suddenly rolled them 
all into a gigantic ball andtossed them up onto 
the rack.Have you heard anything of the case he 
asked.Not a word. I have not seen a paper for so
me days.The London press has not had very full a
ccounts. I have just beenlooking through all the
 recent papers in order to master theparticulars
. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of tho
se simplecases which are so extremely difficult.
That sounds a little paradoxical.But it is profo
undly true. Singularity is almost invariably a c
lue.The more featureless and commonplace a crime
 is, the more difficult itis to bring it home. I
n this case, however, they have established aver
y serious case against the son of the murdered m
an.It is a murder, thenWell, it is conjectured t
o be so. I shall take nothing for granteduntil I
 have the opportunity of looking personally into
 it. I willexplain the state of things to you, a
s far as I have been able tounderstand it, in a 
very few words.Boscombe Valley is a country dist
rict not very far from Ross, inHerefordshire. Th
e largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr
. JohnTurner, who made his money in Australia an
d returned some years ago tothe old country. One
 of the farms which he held, that of Hatherley, 
waslet to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an 
ex-Australian. The men hadknown each other in th
e colonies, so that it was not unnatural thatwhe
n they came to settle down they should do so as 
near each other aspossible. Turner was apparentl
y the richer man, so McCarthy became histenant b
ut still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfe
ct equality, asthey were frequently together. Mc
Carthy had one son, a lad of eighteen,and Turner
 had an only daughter of the same age, but neith
er of themhad wives living. They appear to have 
avoided the society of theneighbouring English f
amilies and to have led retired lives, thoughbot
h the McCarthys were fond of sport and were freq
uently seen at therace-meetings of the neighbour
hood. McCarthy kept two servants-a manand a girl
. Turner had a considerable household, some half
-dozen at theleast. That is as much as I have be
en able to gather about thefamilies. Now for the
 facts.On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McC
arthy left his house atHatherley about three in 
the afternoon and walked down to the BoscombePoo
l, which is a small lake formed by the spreading
 out of the streamwhich runs down the Boscombe V
alley. He had been out with hisserving-man in th
e morning at Ross, and he had told the man that 
hemust hurry, as he had an appointment of import
ance to keep at three.From that appointment he n
ever came back alive.From Hatherley Farmhouse to
 the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a mile,and tw
o people saw him as he passed over this ground. 
One was an oldwoman, whose name is not mentioned
, and the other was William Crowder,a game-keepe
r in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these witnes
ses deposethat Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. T
he game-keeper adds that within afew minutes of 
his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen his son
, Mr.James McCarthy, going the same way with a g
un under his arm. To thebest of his belief, the 
father was actually in sight at the time, andthe
 son was following him. He thought no more of th
e matter until heheard in the evening of the tra
gedy that had occurred.The two McCarthys were se
en after the time when William Crowder, thegame-
keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is
 thickly woodedround, with just a fringe of gras
s and of reeds round the edge. A girlof fourteen
, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lod
ge-keeper ofthe Boscombe Valley estate, was in o
ne of the woods picking flowers.She states that 
while she was there she saw, at the border of th
e woodand close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and hi
s son, and that they appearedto be having a viol
ent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder us
ingvery strong language to his son, and she saw 
the latter raise up hishand as if to strike his 
father. She was so frightened by theirviolence t
hat she ran away and told her mother when she re
ached homethat she had left the two McCarthys qu
arrelling near Boscombe Pool, andthat she was af
raid that they were going to fight. She had hard
ly saidthe words when young Mr. McCarthy came ru
nning up to the lodge to saythat he had found hi
s father dead in the wood, and to ask for the he
lpof the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, with
out either his gun or hishat, and his right hand
 and sleeve were observed to be stained withfres
h blood. On following him they found the dead bo
dy stretched outupon the grass beside the pool. 
The head had been beaten in by repeatedblows of 
some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were s
uch as mightvery well have been inflicted by the
 butt-end of his sons gun, whichwas found lying 
on the grass within a few paces of the body. Und
erthese circumstances the young man was instantl
y arrested, and a verdictof wilful murder having
 been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, hewas 
on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at R
oss, who havereferred the case to the next Assiz
es. Those are the main facts of thecase as they 
came out before the coroner and the police-court
.I could hardly imagine a more damning case, I r
emarked. If evercircumstantial evidence pointed 
to a criminal it does so here.Circumstantial evi
dence is a very tricky thing, answered Holmestho
ughtfully. It may seem to point very straight to
 one thing, but ifyou shift your own point of vi
ew a little, you may find it pointing inan equal
ly uncompromising manner to something entirely d
ifferent. Itmust be confessed, however, that the
 case looks exceedingly graveagainst the young m
an, and it is very possible that he is indeed th
eculprit. There are several people in the neighb
ourhood, however, andamong them Miss Turner, the
 daughter of the neighbouring landowner, whobeli
eve in his innocence, and who have retained Lest
rade, whom you mayrecollect in connection with t
he Study in Scarlet, to work out the casein his 
interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has re
ferred the caseto me, and hence it is that two m
iddle-aged gentlemen are flyingwestward at fifty
 miles an hour instead of quietly digesting thei
rbreakfasts at home.I am afraid, said I, that th
e facts are so obvious that you willfind little 
credit to be gained out of this case.There is no
thing more deceptive than an obvious fact, he an
swered,laughing. Besides, we may chance to hit u
pon some other obvious factswhich may have been 
by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know me
too well to think that I am boasting when I say 
that I shall eitherconfirm or destroy his theory
 by means which he is quite incapable ofemployin
g, or even of understanding. To take the first e
xample to hand,I very clearly perceive that in y
our bedroom the window is upon theright-hand sid
e, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would
 havenoted even so self-evident a thing as that.
How on earth-My dear fellow, I know you well. I 
know the military neatness whichcharacterises yo
u. You shave every morning, and in this season y
oushave by the sunlight; but since your shaving 
is less and less completeas we get farther back 
on the left side, until it becomes positivelyslo
venly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it i
s surely very clearthat that side is less illumi
nated than the other. I could not imaginea man o
f your habits looking at himself in an equal lig
ht and beingsatisfied with such a result. I only
 quote this as a trivial example ofobservation a
nd inference. Therein lies my mtier, and it is j
ustpossible that it may be of some service in th
e investigation which liesbefore us. There are o
ne or two minor points which were brought out in
the inquest, and which are worth considering.Wha
t are theyIt appears that his arrest did not tak
e place at once, but after thereturn to Hatherle
y Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informi
nghim that he was a prisoner, he remarked that h
e was not surprised tohear it, and that it was n
o more than his deserts. This observation ofhis 
had the natural effect of removing any traces of
 doubt which mighthave remained in the minds of 
the coroners jury.It was a confession, I ejacula
ted.No, for it was followed by a protestation of
 innocence.Coming on the top of such a damning s
eries of events, it was at leasta most suspiciou
s remark.On the contrary, said Holmes, it is the
 brightest rift which I canat present see in the
 clouds. However innocent he might be, he couldn
ot be such an absolute imbecile as not to see th
at the circumstanceswere very black against him.
 Had he appeared surprised at his ownarrest, or 
feigned indignation at it, I should have looked 
upon it ashighly suspicious, because such surpri
se or anger would not be naturalunder the circum
stances, and yet might appear to be the best pol
icy toa scheming man. His frank acceptance of th
e situation marks him aseither an innocent man, 
or else as a man of considerable self-restrainta
nd firmness. As to his remark about his deserts,
 it was also notunnatural if you consider that h
e stood beside the dead body of hisfather, and t
hat there is no doubt that he had that very day 
so farforgotten his filial duty as to bandy word
s with him, and even,according to the little gir
l whose evidence is so important, to raisehis ha
nd as if to strike him. The self-reproach and co
ntrition whichare displayed in his remark appear
 to me to be the signs of a healthymind rather t
han of a guilty one.I shook my head. Many men ha
ve been hanged on far slighter evidence,I remark
ed.So they have. And many men have been wrongful
ly hanged.What is the young mans own account of 
the matterIt is, I am afraid, not very encouragi
ng to his supporters, thoughthere are one or two
 points in it which are suggestive. You will fin
dit here, and may read it for yourself.He picked
 out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefor
dshire paper,and having turned down the sheet he
 pointed out the paragraph in whichthe unfortuna
te young man had given his own statement of what
 hadoccurred. I settled myself down in the corne
r of the carriage and readit very carefully. It 
ran in this wayMr. James McCarthy, the only son 
of the deceased, was then called andgave evidenc
e as follows I had been away from home for three
 days atBristol, and had only just returned upon
 the morning of last Monday,the 3rd. My father w
as absent from home at the time of my arrival, a
ndI was informed by the maid that he had driven 
over to Ross with JohnCobb, the groom. Shortly a
fter my return I heard the wheels of his trapin 
the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw h
im get out and walkrapidly out of the yard, thou
gh I was not aware in which direction hewas goin
g. I then took my gun and strolled out in the di
rection of theBoscombe Pool, with the intention 
of visiting the rabbit warren whichis upon the o
ther side. On my way I saw William Crowder, theg
ame-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; bu
t he is mistaken inthinking that I was following
 my father. I had no idea that he was infront of
 me. When about a hundred yards from the pool I 
heard a cry ofCooee which was a usual signal bet
ween my father and myself. I thenhurried forward
, and found him standing by the pool. He appeare
d to bemuch surprised at seeing me and asked me 
rather roughly what I wasdoing there. A conversa
tion ensued which led to high words and almostto
 blows, for my father was a man of a very violen
t temper. Seeing thathis passion was becoming un
governable, I left him and returned towardsHathe
rley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, h
owever, when Iheard a hideous outcry behind me, 
which caused me to run back again. Ifound my fat
her expiring upon the ground, with his head terr
iblyinjured. I dropped my gun and held him in my
 arms, but he almostinstantly expired. I knelt b
eside him for some minutes, and then mademy way 
to Mr. Turners lodge-keeper, his house being the
 nearest, toask for assistance. I saw no one nea
r my father when I returned, and Ihave no idea h
ow he came by his injuries. He was not a popular
 man,being somewhat cold and forbidding in his m
anners, but he had, as faras I know, no active e
nemies. I know nothing further of the matter.The
 Coroner Did your father make any statement to y
ou before he diedWitness He mumbled a few words,
 but I could only catch some allusionto a rat.Th
e Coroner What did you understand by thatWitness
 It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he
 wasdelirious.The Coroner What was the point upo
n which you and your father hadthis final quarre
lWitness I should prefer not to answer.The Coron
er I am afraid that I must press it.Witness It i
s really impossible for me to tell you. I can as
sure youthat it has nothing to do with the sad t
ragedy which followed.The Coroner That is for th
e court to decide. I need not point out toyou th
at your refusal to answer will prejudice your ca
se considerablyin any future proceedings which m
ay arise.Witness I must still refuse.The Coroner
 I understand that the cry of Cooee was a common
 signalbetween you and your fatherWitness It was
.The Coroner How was it, then, that he uttered i
t before he saw you,and before he even knew that
 you had returned from BristolWitness with consi
derable confusion I do not know.A Juryman Did yo
u see nothing which aroused your suspicions when
 youreturned on hearing the cry and found your f
ather fatally injuredWitness Nothing definite.Th
e Coroner What do you meanWitness I was so distu
rbed and excited as I rushed out into the open,t
hat I could think of nothing except of my father
. Yet I have a vagueimpression that as I ran for
ward something lay upon the ground to theleft of
 me. It seemed to me to be something grey in col
our, a coat ofsome sort, or a plaid perhaps. Whe
n I rose from my father I lookedround for it, bu
t it was gone.Do you mean that it disappeared be
fore you went for helpYes, it was gone.You canno
t say what it wasNo, I had a feeling something w
as there.How far from the bodyA dozen yards or s
o.And how far from the edge of the woodAbout the
 same.Then if it was removed it was while you we
re within a dozen yards ofitYes, but with my bac
k towards it.This concluded the examination of t
he witness.I see, said I as I glanced down the c
olumn, that the coroner in hisconcluding remarks
 was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He calls
attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy a
bout his father havingsignalled to him before se
eing him, also to his refusal to give detailsof 
his conversation with his father, and his singul
ar account of hisfathers dying words. They are a
ll, as he remarks, very much againstthe son.Holm
es laughed softly to himself and stretched himse
lf out upon thecushioned seat. Both you and the 
coroner have been at some pains,said he, to sing
le out the very strongest points in the young ma
nsfavour. Dont you see that you alternately give
 him credit for havingtoo much imagination and t
oo little Too little, if he could not inventa ca
use of quarrel which would give him the sympathy
 of the jury; toomuch, if he evolved from his ow
n inner consciousness anything sooutr as a dying
 reference to a rat, and the incident of thevani
shing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case
 from the point ofview that what this young man 
says is true, and we shall see whitherthat hypot
hesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Pe
trarch, andnot another word shall I say of this 
case until we are on the scene ofaction. We lunc
h at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there i
n twentyminutes.It was nearly four oclock when w
e at last, after passing through thebeautiful St
roud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn,
 foundourselves at the pretty little country-tow
n of Ross. A lean,ferret-like man, furtive and s
ly-looking, was waiting for us upon theplatform.
 In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leathe
r-leggingswhich he wore in deference to his rust
ic surroundings, I had nodifficulty in recognisi
ng Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we drove
to the Hereford Arms where a room had already be
en engaged for us.I have ordered a carriage, sai
d Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea.I knew yo
ur energetic nature, and that you would not be h
appy untilyou had been on the scene of the crime
.It was very nice and complimentary of you, Holm
es answered. It isentirely a question of baromet
ric pressure.Lestrade looked startled. I do not 
quite follow, he said.How is the glass Twenty-ni
ne, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in thesky. I
 have a caseful of cigarettes here which need sm
oking, and thesofa is very much superior to the 
usual country hotel abomination. I donot think t
hat it is probable that I shall use the carriage
 to-night.Lestrade laughed indulgently. You have
, no doubt, already formed yourconclusions from 
the newspapers, he said. The case is as plain as
 apikestaff, and the more one goes into it the p
lainer it becomes. Still,of course, one cant ref
use a lady, and such a very positive one, too.Sh
e has heard of you, and would have your opinion,
 though I repeatedlytold her that there was noth
ing which you could do which I had notalready do
ne. Why, bless my soul here is her carriage at t
he door.He had hardly spoken before there rushed
 into the room one of the mostlovely young women
 that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet ey
esshining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon he
r cheeks, all thought ofher natural reserve lost
 in her overpowering excitement and concern.Oh, 
Mr. Sherlock Holmes she cried, glancing from one
 to the other ofus, and finally, with a womans q
uick intuition, fastening upon mycompanion, I am
 so glad that you have come. I have driven down 
to tellyou so. I know that James didnt do it. I 
know it, and I want you tostart upon your work k
nowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt upontha
t point. We have known each other since we were 
little children, andI know his faults as no one 
else does; but he is too tender-hearted tohurt a
 fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who real
ly knows him.I hope we may clear him, Miss Turne
r, said Sherlock Holmes. You mayrely upon my doi
ng all that I can.But you have read the evidence
. You have formed some conclusion Doyou not see 
some loophole, some flaw Do you not yourself thi
nk that heis innocentI think that it is very pro
bable.There, now she cried, throwing back her he
ad and looking defiantlyat Lestrade. You hear He
 gives me hopes.Lestrade shrugged his shoulders.
 I am afraid that my colleague hasbeen a little 
quick in forming his conclusions, he said.But he
 is right. Oh I know that he is right. James nev
er did it. Andabout his quarrel with his father,
 I am sure that the reason why hewould not speak
 about it to the coroner was because I was conce
rned init.In what way asked Holmes.It is no time
 for me to hide anything. James and his father h
ad manydisagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was 
very anxious that there shouldbe a marriage betw
een us. James and I have always loved each other
 asbrother and sister; but of course he is young
 and has seen very littleof life yet, and-and-we
ll, he naturally did not wish to do anythinglike
 that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I a
m sure, was one ofthem.And your father asked Hol
mes. Was he in favour of such a unionNo, he was 
averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was i
n favour ofit. A quick blush passed over her fre
sh young face as Holmes shot oneof his keen, que
stioning glances at her.Thank you for this infor
mation, said he. May I see your father if Icall 
to-morrowI am afraid the doctor wont allow it.Th
e doctorYes, have you not heard Poor father has 
never been strong for yearsback, but this has br
oken him down completely. He has taken to his be
d,and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and th
at his nervous system isshattered. Mr. McCarthy 
was the only man alive who had known dad in theo
ld days in Victoria.Ha In Victoria That is impor
tant.Yes, at the mines.Quite so; at the gold-min
es, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner madehis m
oney.Yes, certainly.Thank you, Miss Turner. You 
have been of material assistance to me.You will 
tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt
 you will goto the prison to see James. Oh, if y
ou do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him thatI know him to
 be innocent.I will, Miss Turner.I must go home 
now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if
 Ileave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your 
undertaking. She hurriedfrom the room as impulsi
vely as she had entered, and we heard thewheels 
of her carriage rattle off down the street.I am 
ashamed of you, Holmes, said Lestrade with digni
ty after a fewminutes silence. Why should you ra
ise up hopes which you are bound todisappoint I 
am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel
.I think that I see my way to clearing James McC
arthy, said Holmes.Have you an order to see him 
in prisonYes, but only for you and me.Then I sha
ll reconsider my resolution about going out. We 
have stilltime to take a train to Hereford and s
ee him to-nightAmple.Then let us do so. Watson, 
I fear that you will find it very slow, butI sha
ll only be away a couple of hours.I walked down 
to the station with them, and then wandered thro
ugh thestreets of the little town, finally retur
ning to the hotel, where I layupon the sofa and 
tried to interest myself in a yellow-backed nove
l.The puny plot of the story was so thin, howeve
r, when compared to thedeep mystery through whic
h we were groping, and I found my attentionwande
r so continually from the action to the fact, th
at I at last flungit across the room and gave my
self up entirely to a consideration ofthe events
 of the day. Supposing that this unhappy young m
ans storywere absolutely true, then what hellish
 thing, what absolutelyunforeseen and extraordin
ary calamity could have occurred between thetime
 when he parted from his father, and the moment 
when, drawn back byhis screams, he rushed into t
he glade It was something terrible anddeadly. Wh
at could it be Might not the nature of the injur
ies revealsomething to my medical instincts I ra
ng the bell and called for theweekly county pape
r, which contained a verbatim account of the inq
uest.In the surgeons deposition it was stated th
at the posterior third ofthe left parietal bone 
and the left half of the occipital bone had been
shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. I
 marked the spot uponmy own head. Clearly such a
 blow must have been struck from behind.That was
 to some extent in favour of the accused, as whe
n seenquarrelling he was face to face with his f
ather. Still, it did not gofor very much, for th
e older man might have turned his back before th
eblow fell. Still, it might be worth while to ca
ll Holmes attention toit. Then there was the pec
uliar dying reference to a rat. What couldthat m
ean It could not be delirium. A man dying from a
 sudden blowdoes not commonly become delirious. 
No, it was more likely to be anattempt to explai
n how he met his fate. But what could it indicat
e Icudgelled my brains to find some possible exp
lanation. And then theincident of the grey cloth
 seen by young McCarthy. If that were truethe mu
rderer must have dropped some part of his dress,
 presumably hisovercoat, in his flight, and must
 have had the hardihood to return andto carry it
 away at the instant when the son was kneeling w
ith his backturned not a dozen paces off. What a
 tissue of mysteries andimprobabilities the whol
e thing was I did not wonder at Lestradesopinion
, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes
 insight that Icould not lose hope as long as ev
ery fresh fact seemed to strengthenhis convictio
n of young McCarthys innocence.It was late befor
e Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, 
forLestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
The glass still keeps very high, he remarked as 
he sat down. It isof importance that it should n
ot rain before we are able to go over theground.
 On the other hand, a man should be at his very 
best and keenestfor such nice work as that, and 
I did not wish to do it when fagged bya long jou
rney. I have seen young McCarthy.And what did yo
u learn from himNothing.Could he throw no lightN
one at all. I was inclined to think at one time 
that he knew who haddone it and was screening hi
m or her, but I am convinced now that he isas pu
zzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-w
itted youth,though comely to look at and, I shou
ld think, sound at heart.I cannot admire his tas
te, I remarked, if it is indeed a fact thathe wa
s averse to a marriage with so charming a young 
lady as this MissTurner.Ah, thereby hangs a rath
er painful tale. This fellow is madly,insanely, 
in love with her, but some two years ago, when h
e was only alad, and before he really knew her, 
for she had been away five years ata boarding-sc
hool, what does the idiot do but get into the cl
utches ofa barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a
 registry office No one knows aword of the matte
r, but you can imagine how maddening it must be 
to himto be upbraided for not doing what he woul
d give his very eyes to do,but what he knows to 
be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy of
this sort which made him throw his hands up into
 the air when hisfather, at their last interview
, was goading him on to propose to MissTurner. O
n the other hand, he had no means of supporting 
himself, andhis father, who was by all accounts 
a very hard man, would have thrownhim over utter
ly had he known the truth. It was with his barma
id wifethat he had spent the last three days in 
Bristol, and his father didnot know where he was
. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good has
come out of evil, however, for the barmaid, find
ing from the papersthat he is in serious trouble
 and likely to be hanged, has thrown himover utt
erly and has written to him to say that she has 
a husbandalready in the Bermuda Dockyard, so tha
t there is really no tie betweenthem. I think th
at that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy 
for allthat he has suffered.But if he is innocen
t, who has done itAh who I would call your atten
tion very particularly to two points.One is that
 the murdered man had an appointment with someon
e at thepool, and that the someone could not hav
e been his son, for his son wasaway, and he did 
not know when he would return. The second is tha
t themurdered man was heard to cry Cooee before 
he knew that his son hadreturned. Those are the 
crucial points upon which the case depends. Andn
ow let us talk about George Meredith, if you ple
ase, and we shallleave all minor matters until t
o-morrow.There was no rain, as Holmes had foreto
ld, and the morning broke brightand cloudless. A
t nine oclock Lestrade called for us with thecar
riage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the
 Boscombe Pool.There is serious news this mornin
g, Lestrade observed. It is saidthat Mr. Turner,
 of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despair
ed of.An elderly man, I presume said Holmes.Abou
t sixty; but his constitution has been shattered
 by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing h
ealth for some time. This businesshas had a very
 bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of Mc
Carthys,and, I may add, a great benefactor to hi
m, for I have learned that hegave him Hatherley 
Farm rent free.Indeed That is interesting, said 
Holmes.Oh, yes In a hundred other ways he has he
lped him. Everybody abouthere speaks of his kind
ness to him.Really Does it not strike you as a l
ittle singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to
 have had little of his own, and to have beenund
er such obligations to Turner, should still talk
 of marrying his sonto Turners daughter, who is,
 presumably, heiress to the estate, andthat in s
uch a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely
 a case of aproposal and all else would follow I
t is the more strange, since weknow that Turner 
himself was averse to the idea. The daughter tol
d usas much. Do you not deduce something from th
atWe have got to the deductions and the inferenc
es, said Lestrade,winking at me. I find it hard 
enough to tackle facts, Holmes, withoutflying aw
ay after theories and fancies.You are right, sai
d Holmes demurely; you do find it very hard tota
ckle the facts.Anyhow, I have grasped one fact w
hich you seem to find it difficult toget hold of
, replied Lestrade with some warmth.And that is-
That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy
 junior and that alltheories to the contrary are
 the merest moonshine.Well, moonshine is a brigh
ter thing than fog, said Holmes, laughing.But I 
am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley F
arm upon theleft.Yes, that is it. It was a wides
pread, comfortable-looking building,two-storied,
 slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lic
hen uponthe grey walls. The drawn blinds and the
 smokeless chimneys, however,gave it a stricken 
look, as though the weight of this horror still 
layheavy upon it. We called at the door, when th
e maid, at Holmesrequest, showed us the boots wh
ich her master wore at the time of hisdeath, and
 also a pair of the sons, though not the pair wh
ich he hadthen had. Having measured these very c
arefully from seven or eightdifferent points, Ho
lmes desired to be led to the court-yard, fromwh
ich we all followed the winding track which led 
to Boscombe Pool.Sherlock Holmes was transformed
 when he was hot upon such a scent asthis. Men w
ho had only known the quiet thinker and logician
 of BakerStreet would have failed to recognise h
im. His face flushed anddarkened. His brows were
 drawn into two hard black lines, while hiseyes 
shone out from beneath them with a steely glitte
r. His face wasbent downward, his shoulders bowe
d, his lips compressed, and the veinsstood out l
ike whipcord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostr
ils seemedto dilate with a purely animal lust fo
r the chase, and his mind was soabsolutely conce
ntrated upon the matter before him that a questi
on orremark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at 
the most, only provoked aquick, impatient snarl 
in reply. Swiftly and silently he made his wayal
ong the track which ran through the meadows, and
 so by way of thewoods to the Boscombe Pool. It 
was damp, marshy ground, as is all thatdistrict,
 and there were marks of many feet, both upon th
e path andamid the short grass which bounded it 
on either side. Sometimes Holmeswould hurry on, 
sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite a li
ttledetour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walke
d behind him, the detectiveindifferent and conte
mptuous, while I watched my friend with theinter
est which sprang from the conviction that every 
one of his actionswas directed towards a definit
e end.The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-
girt sheet of water somefifty yards across, is s
ituated at the boundary between the HatherleyFar
m and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner
. Above the woodswhich lined it upon the farther
 side we could see the red, juttingpinnacles whi
ch marked the site of the rich landowners dwelli
ng. Onthe Hatherley side of the pool the woods g
rew very thick, and there wasa narrow belt of so
dden grass twenty paces across between the edge 
ofthe trees and the reeds which lined the lake. 
Lestrade showed us theexact spot at which the bo
dy had been found, and, indeed, so moist wasthe 
ground, that I could plainly see the traces whic
h had been left bythe fall of the stricken man. 
To Holmes, as I could see by his eagerface and p
eering eyes, very many other things were to be r
ead upon thetrampled grass. He ran round, like a
 dog who is picking up a scent, andthen turned u
pon my companion.What did you go into the pool f
or he asked.I fished about with a rake. I though
t there might be some weapon orother trace. But 
how on earth-Oh, tut, tut I have no time That le
ft foot of yours with its inwardtwist is all ove
r the place. A mole could trace it, and there it
vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it woul
d all have been had Ibeen here before they came 
like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all overit. 
Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper ca
me, and they havecovered all tracks for six or e
ight feet round the body. But here arethree sepa
rate tracks of the same feet. He drew out a lens
 and laydown upon his waterproof to have a bette
r view, talking all the timerather to himself th
an to us. These are young McCarthys feet. Twiceh
e was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that 
the soles are deeplymarked and the heels hardly 
visible. That bears out his story. He ranwhen he
 saw his father on the ground. Then here are the
 fathers feetas he paced up and down. What is th
is, then It is the butt-end of thegun as the son
 stood listening. And this Ha, ha What have we h
ereTiptoes tiptoes Square, too, quite unusual bo
ots They come, they go,they come again-of course
 that was for the cloak. Now where did theycome 
from He ran up and down, sometimes losing, somet
imes finding thetrack until we were well within 
the edge of the wood and under theshadow of a gr
eat beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood
. Holmestraced his way to the farther side of th
is and lay down once more uponhis face with a li
ttle cry of satisfaction. For a long time he rem
ainedthere, turning over the leaves and dried st
icks, gathering up whatseemed to me to be dust i
nto an envelope and examining with his lensnot o
nly the ground but even the bark of the tree as 
far as he couldreach. A jagged stone was lying a
mong the moss, and this also hecarefully examine
d and retained. Then he followed a pathway throu
gh thewood until he came to the high road, where
 all traces were lost.It has been a case of cons
iderable interest, he remarked, returningto his 
natural manner. I fancy that this grey house on 
the right mustbe the lodge. I think that I will 
go in and have a word with Moran, andperhaps wri
te a little note. Having done that, we may drive
 back to ourluncheon. You may walk to the cab, a
nd I shall be with you presently.It was about te
n minutes before we regained our cab and drove b
ack intoRoss, Holmes still carrying with him the
 stone which he had picked upin the wood.This ma
y interest you, Lestrade, he remarked, holding i
t out. Themurder was done with it.I see no marks
.There are none.How do you know, thenThe grass w
as growing under it. It had only lain there a fe
w days.There was no sign of a place whence it ha
d been taken. It correspondswith the injuries. T
here is no sign of any other weapon.And the murd
ererIs a tall man, left-handed, limps with the r
ight leg, wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a 
grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, usesa cigar-ho
lder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocke
t. There areseveral other indications, but these
 may be enough to aid us in oursearch.Lestrade l
aughed. I am afraid that I am still a sceptic, h
e said.Theories are all very well, but we have t
o deal with a hard-headedBritish jury.Nous verro
ns, answered Holmes calmly. You work your own me
thod,and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this
 afternoon, and shallprobably return to London b
y the evening train.And leave your case unfinish
edNo, finished.But the mysteryIt is solved.Who w
as the criminal, thenThe gentleman I describe.Bu
t who is heSurely it would not be difficult to f
ind out. This is not such apopulous neighbourhoo
d.Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. I am a practi
cal man, he said, andI really cannot undertake t
o go about the country looking for aleft-handed 
gentleman with a game leg. I should become thela
ughing-stock of Scotland Yard.All right, said Ho
lmes quietly. I have given you the chance. Herea
re your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a l
ine before I leave.Having left Lestrade at his r
ooms, we drove to our hotel, where wefound lunch
 upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in
 thoughtwith a pained expression upon his face, 
as one who finds himself in aperplexing position
.Look here, Watson, he said when the cloth was c
leared just sit downin this chair and let me pre
ach to you for a little. I dont know quitewhat t
o do, and I should value your advice. Light a ci
gar and let meexpound. Pray do so.Well, now, in 
considering this case there are two points about
 youngMcCarthys narrative which struck us both i
nstantly, although theyimpressed me in his favou
r and you against him. One was the fact thathis 
father should, according to his account, cry Coo
ee before seeinghim. The other was his singular 
dying reference to a rat. He mumbledseveral word
s, you understand, but that was all that caught 
the sonsear. Now from this double point our rese
arch must commence, and we willbegin it by presu
ming that what the lad says is absolutely true.W
hat of this Cooee thenWell, obviously it could n
ot have been meant for the son. The son, asfar a
s he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance th
at he was withinearshot. The Cooee was meant to 
attract the attention of whoever itwas that he h
ad the appointment with. But Cooee is a distinct
lyAustralian cry, and one which is used between 
Australians. There is astrong presumption that t
he person whom McCarthy expected to meet himat B
oscombe Pool was someone who had been in Austral
ia.What of the rat, thenSherlock Holmes took a f
olded paper from his pocket and flattened itout 
on the table. This is a map of the Colony of Vic
toria, he said.I wired to Bristol for it last ni
ght. He put his hand over part ofthe map. What d
o you readARAT, I read.And now He raised his han
d.BALLARAT.Quite so. That was the word the man u
ttered, and of which his son onlycaught the last
 two syllables. He was trying to utter the name 
of hismurderer. So and so, of Ballarat.It is won
derful I exclaimed.It is obvious. And now, you s
ee, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably. T
he possession of a grey garment was a third poin
t which,granting the sons statement to be correc
t, was a certainty. We havecome now out of mere 
vagueness to the definite conception of anAustra
lian from Ballarat with a grey cloak.Certainly.A
nd one who was at home in the district, for the 
pool can only beapproached by the farm or by the
 estate, where strangers could hardlywander.Quit
e so.Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an 
examination of the ground Igained the trifling d
etails which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, a
sto the personality of the criminal.But how did 
you gain themYou know my method. It is founded u
pon the observation of trifles.His height I know
 that you might roughly judge from the length of
 hisstride. His boots, too, might be told from t
heir traces.Yes, they were peculiar boots.But hi
s lamenessThe impression of his right foot was a
lways less distinct than hisleft. He put less we
ight upon it. Why Because he limped-he was lame.
But his left-handedness.You were yourself struck
 by the nature of the injury as recorded bythe s
urgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from 
immediatelybehind, and yet was upon the left sid
e. Now, how can that be unless itwere by a left-
handed man He had stood behind that tree during 
theinterview between the father and son. He had 
even smoked there. I foundthe ash of a cigar, wh
ich my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enable
sme to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as 
you know, devoted someattention to this, and wri
tten a little monograph on the ashes of 140diffe
rent varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tob
acco. Having foundthe ash, I then looked round a
nd discovered the stump among the mosswhere he h
ad tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the var
iety whichare rolled in Rotterdam.And the cigar-
holderI could see that the end had not been in h
is mouth. Therefore he useda holder. The tip had
 been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was n
ota clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife.Ho
lmes, I said, you have drawn a net round this ma
n from which hecannot escape, and you have saved
 an innocent human life as truly as ifyou had cu
t the cord which was hanging him. I see the dire
ction inwhich all this points. The culprit is-Mr
. John Turner, cried the hotel waiter, opening t
he door of oursitting-room, and ushering in a vi
sitor.The man who entered was a strange and impr
essive figure. His slow,limping step and bowed s
houlders gave the appearance of decrepitude,and 
yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and h
is enormous limbsshowed that he was possessed of
 unusual strength of body and ofcharacter. His t
angled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding, dr
oopingeyebrows combined to give an air of dignit
y and power to hisappearance, but his face was o
f an ashen white, while his lips and thecorners 
of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue
. It was clearto me at a glance that he was in t
he grip of some deadly and chronicdisease.Pray s
it down on the sofa, said Holmes gently. You had
 my noteYes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You
 said that you wished to seeme here to avoid sca
ndal.I thought people would talk if I went to th
e Hall.And why did you wish to see me He looked 
across at my companion withdespair in his weary 
eyes, as though his question was already answere
d.Yes, said Holmes, answering the look rather th
an the words. It isso. I know all about McCarthy
.The old man sank his face in his hands. God hel
p me he cried. But Iwould not have let the young
 man come to harm. I give you my word thatI woul
d have spoken out if it went against him at the 
Assizes.I am glad to hear you say so, said Holme
s gravely.I would have spoken now had it not bee
n for my dear girl. It wouldbreak her heart-it w
ill break her heart when she hears that I amarre
sted.It may not come to that, said Holmes.WhatI 
am no official agent. I understand that it was y
our daughter whorequired my presence here, and I
 am acting in her interests. YoungMcCarthy must 
be got off, however.I am a dying man, said old T
urner. I have had diabetes for years. Mydoctor s
ays it is a question whether I shall live a mont
h. Yet I wouldrather die under my own roof than 
in a gaol.Holmes rose and sat down at the table 
with his pen in his hand and abundle of paper be
fore him. Just tell us the truth, he said. I sha
lljot down the facts. You will sign it, and Wats
on here can witness it.Then I could produce your
 confession at the last extremity to saveyoung M
cCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it u
nless it isabsolutely needed.Its as well, said t
he old man; its a question whether I shall livet
o the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I
 should wish to spareAlice the shock. And now I 
will make the thing clear to you; it hasbeen a l
ong time in the acting, but will not take me lon
g to tell.You didnt know this dead man, McCarthy
. He was a devil incarnate. Itell you that. God 
keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he
.His grip has been upon me these twenty years, a
nd he has blasted mylife. Ill tell you first how
 I came to be in his power.It was in the early 6
0s at the diggings. I was a young chap then,hot-
blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at a
nything; I gotamong bad companions, took to drin
k, had no luck with my claim, took tothe bush, a
nd in a word became what you would call over her
e a highwayrobber. There were six of us, and we 
had a wild, free life of it,sticking up a statio
n from time to time, or stopping the wagons on t
heroad to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat w
as the name I went under,and our party is still 
remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.On
e day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to M
elbourne, and we layin wait for it and attacked 
it. There were six troopers and six of us,so it 
was a close thing, but we emptied four of their 
saddles at thefirst volley. Three of our boys we
re killed, however, before we got theswag. I put
 my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who 
was thisvery man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord th
at I had shot him then, but Ispared him, though 
I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, a
sthough to remember every feature. We got away w
ith the gold, becamewealthy men, and made our wa
y over to England without being suspected.There 
I parted from my old pals and determined to sett
le down to aquiet and respectable life. I bought
 this estate, which chanced to bein the market, 
and I set myself to do a little good with my mon
ey, tomake up for the way in which I had earned 
it. I married, too, andthough my wife died young
 she left me my dear little Alice. Even whenshe 
was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me d
own the right pathas nothing else had ever done.
 In a word, I turned over a new leaf anddid my b
est to make up for the past. All was going well 
when McCarthylaid his grip upon me.I had gone up
 to town about an investment, and I met him in R
egentStreet with hardly a coat to his back or a 
boot to his foot.Here we are, Jack, says he, tou
ching me on the arm; well be asgood as a family 
to you. Theres two of us, me and my son, and you
 canhave the keeping of us. If you dont-its a fi
ne, law-abiding countryis England, and theres al
ways a policeman within hail.Well, down they cam
e to the west country, there was no shaking them
off, and there they have lived rent free on my b
est land ever since.There was no rest for me, no
 peace, no forgetfulness; turn where Iwould, the
re was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. I
t grew worseas Alice grew up, for he soon saw I 
was more afraid of her knowing mypast than of th
e police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and w
hateverit was I gave him without question, land,
 money, houses, until at lasthe asked a thing wh
ich I could not give. He asked for Alice.His son
, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and
 as I was knownto be in weak health, it seemed a
 fine stroke to him that his ladshould step into
 the whole property. But there I was firm. I wou
ld nothave his cursed stock mixed with mine; not
 that I had any dislike tothe lad, but his blood
 was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm.M
cCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst
. We were to meet atthe pool midway between our 
houses to talk it over.When I went down there I 
found him talking with his son, so I smoked acig
ar and waited behind a tree until he should be a
lone. But as Ilistened to his talk all that was 
black and bitter in me seemed to comeuppermost. 
He was urging his son to marry my daughter with 
as littleregard for what she might think as if s
he were a slut from off thestreets. It drove me 
mad to think that I and all that I held most dea
rshould be in the power of such a man as this. C
ould I not snap thebond I was already a dying an
d a desperate man. Though clear of mindand fairl
y strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was se
aled. But mymemory and my girl Both could be sav
ed if I could but silence thatfoul tongue. I did
 it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as 
Ihave sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to 
atone for it. But thatmy girl should be entangle
d in the same meshes which held me was morethan 
I could suffer. I struck him down with no more c
ompunction than ifhe had been some foul and veno
mous beast. His cry brought back his son;but I h
ad gained the cover of the wood, though I was fo
rced to go backto fetch the cloak which I had dr
opped in my flight. That is the truestory, gentl
emen, of all that occurred.Well, it is not for m
e to judge you, said Holmes as the old mansigned
 the statement which had been drawn out. I pray 
that we maynever be exposed to such a temptation
.I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to doIn
 view of your health, nothing. You are yourself 
aware that you willsoon have to answer for your 
deed at a higher court than the Assizes. Iwill k
eep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemne
d I shall beforced to use it. If not, it shall n
ever be seen by mortal eye; andyour secret, whet
her you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.
Farewell, then, said the old man solemnly. Your 
own deathbeds, whenthey come, will be the easier
 for the thought of the peace which youhave give
n to mine. Tottering and shaking in all his gian
t frame, hestumbled slowly from the room.God hel
p us said Holmes after a long silence. Why does 
fate playsuch tricks with poor, helpless worms I
 never hear of such a case asthis that I do not 
think of Baxters words, and say, There, but fort
he grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.James McCa
rthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strengt
h of a numberof objections which had been drawn 
out by Holmes and submitted to thedefending coun
sel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our
interview, but he is now dead; and there is ever
y prospect that the sonand daughter may come to 
live happily together in ignorance of theblack c
loud which rests upon their past.V. THE FIVE ORA
NGE PIPSWhen I glance over my notes and records 
of the Sherlock Holmes casesbetween the years 82
 and 90, I am faced by so many which presentstra
nge and interesting features that it is no easy 
matter to knowwhich to choose and which to leave
. Some, however, have already gainedpublicity th
rough the papers, and others have not offered a 
field forthose peculiar qualities which my frien
d possessed in so high a degree,and which it is 
the object of these papers to illustrate. Some, 
too,have baffled his analytical skill, and would
 be, as narratives,beginnings without an ending,
 while others have been but partiallycleared up,
 and have their explanations founded rather upon
 conjectureand surmise than on that absolute log
ical proof which was so dear tohim. There is, ho
wever, one of these last which was so remarkable
 inits details and so startling in its results t
hat I am tempted to givesome account of it in sp
ite of the fact that there are points inconnecti
on with it which never have been, and probably n
ever will be,entirely cleared up.The year 87 fur
nished us with a long series of cases of greater
 orless interest, of which I retain the records.
 Among my headings underthis one twelve months I
 find an account of the adventure of theParadol 
Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who h
eld a luxuriousclub in the lower vault of a furn
iture warehouse, of the factsconnected with the 
loss of the British barque Sophy Anderson, of th
esingular adventures of the Grice Patersons in t
he island of Uffa, andfinally of the Camberwell 
poisoning case. In the latter, as may beremember
ed, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the 
dead manswatch, to prove that it had been wound 
up two hours before, and thattherefore the decea
sed had gone to bed within that time-a deduction
which was of the greatest importance in clearing
 up the case. All theseI may sketch out at some 
future date, but none of them present suchsingul
ar features as the strange train of circumstance
s which I havenow taken up my pen to describe.It
 was in the latter days of September, and the eq
uinoctial gales hadset in with exceptional viole
nce. All day the wind had screamed and therain h
ad beaten against the windows, so that even here
 in the heart ofgreat, hand-made London we were 
forced to raise our minds for theinstant from th
e routine of life and to recognise the presence 
of thosegreat elemental forces which shriek at m
ankind through the bars of hiscivilisation, like
 untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, t
hestorm grew higher and louder, and the wind cri
ed and sobbed like achild in the chimney. Sherlo
ck Holmes sat moodily at one side of thefireplac
e cross-indexing his records of crime, while I a
t the other wasdeep in one of Clark Russells fin
e sea-stories until the howl of thegale from wit
hout seemed to blend with the text, and the spla
sh of therain to lengthen out into the long swas
h of the sea waves. My wife wason a visit to her
 mothers, and for a few days I was a dweller onc
emore in my old quarters at Baker Street.Why, sa
id I, glancing up at my companion, that was sure
ly the bell.Who could come to-night Some friend 
of yours, perhapsExcept yourself I have none, he
 answered. I do not encouragevisitors.A client, 
thenIf so, it is a serious case. Nothing less wo
uld bring a man out onsuch a day and at such an 
hour. But I take it that it is more likely tobe 
some crony of the landladys.Sherlock Holmes was 
wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came
 astep in the passage and a tapping at the door.
 He stretched out hislong arm to turn the lamp a
way from himself and towards the vacantchair upo
n which a newcomer must sit.Come in said he.The 
man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty a
t the outside,well-groomed and trimly clad, with
 something of refinement and delicacyin his bear
ing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his
 hand, andhis long shining waterproof told of th
e fierce weather through which hehad come. He lo
oked about him anxiously in the glare of the lam
p, and Icould see that his face was pale and his
 eyes heavy, like those of aman who is weighed d
own with some great anxiety.I owe you an apology
, he said, raising his golden pince-nez to hisey
es. I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that
 I have brought sometraces of the storm and rain
 into your snug chamber.Give me your coat and um
brella, said Holmes. They may rest here onthe ho
ok and will be dry presently. You have come up f
rom thesouth-west, I see.Yes, from Horsham.That 
clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe
 caps is quitedistinctive.I have come for advice
.That is easily got.And help.That is not always 
so easy.I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard
 from Major Prendergast howyou saved him in the 
Tankerville Club scandal.Ah, of course. He was w
rongfully accused of cheating at cards.He said t
hat you could solve anything.He said too much.Th
at you are never beaten.I have been beaten four 
times-three times by men, and once by awoman.But
 what is that compared with the number of your s
uccessesIt is true that I have been generally su
ccessful.Then you may be so with me.I beg that y
ou will draw your chair up to the fire and favou
r me withsome details as to your case.It is no o
rdinary one.None of those which come to me are. 
I am the last court of appeal.And yet I question
, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have
ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplica
ble chain of eventsthan those which have happene
d in my own family.You fill me with interest, sa
id Holmes. Pray give us the essentialfacts from 
the commencement, and I can afterwards question 
you as tothose details which seem to me to be mo
st important.The young man pulled his chair up a
nd pushed his wet feet out towardsthe blaze.My n
ame, said he, is John Openshaw, but my own affai
rs have, as faras I can understand, little to do
 with this awful business. It is ahereditary mat
ter; so in order to give you an idea of the fact
s, I mustgo back to the commencement of the affa
ir.You must know that my grandfather had two son
s-my uncle Elias and myfather Joseph. My father 
had a small factory at Coventry, which heenlarge
d at the time of the invention of bicycling. He 
was a patenteeof the Openshaw unbreakable tire, 
and his business met with suchsuccess that he wa
s able to sell it and to retire upon a handsomec
ompetence.My uncle Elias emigrated to America wh
en he was a young man and becamea planter in Flo
rida, where he was reported to have done very we
ll. Atthe time of the war he fought in Jacksons 
army, and afterwards underHood, where he rose to
 be a colonel. When Lee laid down his arms myunc
le returned to his plantation, where he remained
 for three or fouryears. About 1869 or 1870 he c
ame back to Europe and took a smallestate in Sus
sex, near Horsham. He had made a very considerab
le fortunein the States, and his reason for leav
ing them was his aversion to thenegroes, and his
 dislike of the Republican policy in extending t
hefranchise to them. He was a singular man, fier
ce and quick-tempered,very foul-mouthed when he 
was angry, and of a most retiringdisposition. Du
ring all the years that he lived at Horsham, I d
oubt ifever he set foot in the town. He had a ga
rden and two or three fieldsround his house, and
 there he would take his exercise, though veryof
ten for weeks on end he would never leave his ro
om. He drank a greatdeal of brandy and smoked ve
ry heavily, but he would see no society anddid n
ot want any friends, not even his own brother.He
 didnt mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, 
for at the timewhen he saw me first I was a youn
gster of twelve or so. This would bein the year 
1878, after he had been eight or nine years in E
ngland. Hebegged my father to let me live with h
im and he was very kind to me inhis way. When he
 was sober he used to be fond of playing backgam
mon anddraughts with me, and he would make me hi
s representative both with theservants and with 
the tradespeople, so that by the time that I was
sixteen I was quite master of the house. I kept 
all the keys and couldgo where I liked and do wh
at I liked, so long as I did not disturb himin h
is privacy. There was one singular exception, ho
wever, for he had asingle room, a lumber-room up
 among the attics, which was invariablylocked, a
nd which he would never permit either me or anyo
ne else toenter. With a boys curiosity I have pe
eped through the keyhole, but Iwas never able to
 see more than such a collection of old trunks a
ndbundles as would be expected in such a room.On
e day-it was in March, 1883-a letter with a fore
ign stamp lay uponthe table in front of the colo
nels plate. It was not a common thingfor him to 
receive letters, for his bills were all paid in 
ready money,and he had no friends of any sort. F
rom India said he as he took itup, Pondicherry p
ostmark What can this be Opening it hurriedly, o
utthere jumped five little dried orange pips, wh
ich pattered down uponhis plate. I began to laug
h at this, but the laugh was struck from mylips 
at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, hi
s eyes wereprotruding, his skin the colour of pu
tty, and he glared at the envelopewhich he still
 held in his trembling hand, K. K. K. he shrieke
d, andthen, My God, my God, my sins have overtak
en meWhat is it, uncle I cried.Death, said he, a
nd rising from the table he retired to his room,
leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up th
e envelope and sawscrawled in red ink upon the i
nner flap, just above the gum, the letterK three
 times repeated. There was nothing else save the
 five driedpips. What could be the reason of his
 overpowering terror I left thebreakfast-table, 
and as I ascended the stair I met him coming dow
n withan old rusty key, which must have belonged
 to the attic, in one hand,and a small brass box
, like a cashbox, in the other.They may do what 
they like, but Ill checkmate them still, said he
with an oath. Tell Mary that I shall want a fire
 in my room to-day,and send down to Fordham, the
 Horsham lawyer.I did as he ordered, and when th
e lawyer arrived I was asked to stepup to the ro
om. The fire was burning brightly, and in the gr
ate therewas a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as o
f burned paper, while the brassbox stood open an
d empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I not
iced,with a start, that upon the lid was printed
 the treble K which I hadread in the morning upo
n the envelope.I wish you, John, said my uncle, 
to witness my will. I leave myestate, with all i
ts advantages and all its disadvantages, to mybr
other, your father, whence it will, no doubt, de
scend to you. If youcan enjoy it in peace, well 
and good If you find you cannot, take myadvice, 
my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I 
am sorry togive you such a two-edged thing, but 
I cant say what turn things aregoing to take. Ki
ndly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.
I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer t
ook it away with him.The singular incident made,
 as you may think, the deepest impressionupon me
, and I pondered over it and turned it every way
 in my mindwithout being able to make anything o
f it. Yet I could not shake offthe vague feeling
 of dread which it left behind, though the sensa
tiongrew less keen as the weeks passed and nothi
ng happened to disturb theusual routine of our l
ives. I could see a change in my uncle, however.
He drank more than ever, and he was less incline
d for any sort ofsociety. Most of his time he wo
uld spend in his room, with the doorlocked upon 
the inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a s
ort ofdrunken frenzy and would burst out of the 
house and tear about thegarden with a revolver i
n his hand, screaming out that he was afraid ofn
o man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like
 a sheep in a pen, byman or devil. When these ho
t fits were over, however, he would rushtumultuo
usly in at the door and lock and bar it behind h
im, like a manwho can brazen it out no longer ag
ainst the terror which lies at theroots of his s
oul. At such times I have seen his face, even on
 a coldday, glisten with moisture, as though it 
were new raised from a basin.Well, to come to an
 end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse
your patience, there came a night when he made o
ne of those drunkensallies from which he never c
ame back. We found him, when we went tosearch fo
r him, face downward in a little green-scummed p
ool, which layat the foot of the garden. There w
as no sign of any violence, and thewater was but
 two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard 
to hisknown eccentricity, brought in a verdict o
f suicide. But I, who knewhow he winced from the
 very thought of death, had much ado to persuade
myself that he had gone out of his way to meet i
t. The matter passed,however, and my father ente
red into possession of the estate, and ofsome  1
4,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.One m
oment, Holmes interposed, your statement is, I f
oresee, one ofthe most remarkable to which I hav
e ever listened. Let me have the dateof the rece
ption by your uncle of the letter, and the date 
of hissupposed suicide.The letter arrived on Mar
ch 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later,upo
n the night of May 2nd.Thank you. Pray proceed.W
hen my father took over the Horsham property, he
, at my request, madea careful examination of th
e attic, which had been always locked up. Wefoun
d the brass box there, although its contents had
 been destroyed. Onthe inside of the cover was a
 paper label, with the initials of K. K.K. repea
ted upon it, and Letters, memoranda, receipts, a
nd a registerwritten beneath. These, we presume,
 indicated the nature of the paperswhich had bee
n destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, t
here wasnothing of much importance in the attic 
save a great many scatteredpapers and note-books
 bearing upon my uncles life in America. Some of
them were of the war time and showed that he had
 done his duty well andhad borne the repute of a
 brave soldier. Others were of a date duringthe 
reconstruction of the Southern states, and were 
mostly concernedwith politics, for he had eviden
tly taken a strong part in opposing thecarpet-ba
g politicians who had been sent down from the No
rth.Well, it was the beginning of 84 when my fat
her came to live atHorsham, and all went as well
 as possible with us until the January of85. On 
the fourth day after the new year I heard my fat
her give asharp cry of surprise as we sat togeth
er at the breakfast-table. Therehe was, sitting 
with a newly opened envelope in one hand and fiv
e driedorange pips in the outstretched palm of t
he other one. He had alwayslaughed at what he ca
lled my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, b
uthe looked very scared and puzzled now that the
 same thing had come uponhimself.Why, what on ea
rth does this mean, John he stammered.My heart h
ad turned to lead. It is K. K. K., said I.He loo
ked inside the envelope. So it is, he cried. Her
e are thevery letters. But what is this written 
above themPut the papers on the sundial, I read,
 peeping over his shoulder.What papers What sund
ial he asked.The sundial in the garden. There is
 no other, said I; but thepapers must be those t
hat are destroyed.Pooh said he, gripping hard at
 his courage. We are in a civilisedland here, an
d we cant have tomfoolery of this kind. Where do
es thething come fromFrom Dundee, I answered, gl
ancing at the postmark.Some preposterous practic
al joke, said he. What have I to do withsundials
 and papers I shall take no notice of such nonse
nse.I should certainly speak to the police, I sa
id.And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of th
e sort.Then let me do soNo, I forbid you. I wont
 have a fuss made about such nonsense.It was in 
vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstin
ate man. Iwent about, however, with a heart whic
h was full of forebodings.On the third day after
 the coming of the letter my father went fromhom
e to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody,
 who is in commandof one of the forts upon Ports
down Hill. I was glad that he should go,for it s
eemed to me that he was farther from danger when
 he was awayfrom home. In that, however, I was i
n error. Upon the second day of hisabsence I rec
eived a telegram from the major, imploring me to
 come atonce. My father had fallen over one of t
he deep chalk-pits which aboundin the neighbourh
ood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered s
kull.I hurried to him, but he passed away withou
t having ever recovered hisconsciousness. He had
, as it appears, been returning from Fareham int
he twilight, and as the country was unknown to h
im, and the chalk-pitunfenced, the jury had no h
esitation in bringing in a verdict of deathfrom 
accidental causes. Carefully as I examined every
 fact connectedwith his death, I was unable to f
ind anything which could suggest theidea of murd
er. There were no signs of violence, no footmark
s, norobbery, no record of strangers having been
 seen upon the roads. Andyet I need not tell you
 that my mind was far from at ease, and that Iwa
s well-nigh certain that some foul plot had been
 woven round him.In this sinister way I came int
o my inheritance. You will ask me why Idid not d
ispose of it I answer, because I was well convin
ced that ourtroubles were in some way dependent 
upon an incident in my uncleslife, and that the 
danger would be as pressing in one house as inan
other.It was in January, 85, that my poor father
 met his end, and two yearsand eight months have
 elapsed since then. During that time I have liv
edhappily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope th
at this curse had passedaway from the family, an
d that it had ended with the last generation. Ih
ad begun to take comfort too soon, however; yest
erday morning the blowfell in the very shape in 
which it had come upon my father.The young man t
ook from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and 
turningto the table he shook out upon it five li
ttle dried orange pips.This is the envelope, he 
continued. The postmark is London-easterndivisio
n. Within are the very words which were upon my 
fathers lastmessage K. K. K.; and then Put the p
apers on the sundial.What have you done asked Ho
lmes.Nothing.NothingTo tell the truth-he sank hi
s face into his thin, white hands-I havefelt hel
pless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbit
s when thesnake is writhing towards it. I seem t
o be in the grasp of someresistless, inexorable 
evil, which no foresight and no precautions cang
uard against.Tut tut cried Sherlock Holmes. You 
must act, man, or you are lost.Nothing but energ
y can save you. This is no time for despair.I ha
ve seen the police.AhBut they listened to my sto
ry with a smile. I am convinced that theinspecto
r has formed the opinion that the letters are al
l practicaljokes, and that the deaths of my rela
tions were really accidents, asthe jury stated, 
and were not to be connected with the warnings.H
olmes shook his clenched hands in the air. Incre
dible imbecility hecried.They have, however, all
owed me a policeman, who may remain in thehouse 
with me.Has he come with you to-nightNo. His ord
ers were to stay in the house.Again Holmes raved
 in the air.Why did you come to me he said, and,
 above all, why did you notcome at onceI did not
 know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major 
Prendergastabout my troubles and was advised by 
him to come to you.It is really two days since y
ou had the letter. We should have actedbefore th
is. You have no further evidence, I suppose, tha
n that whichyou have placed before us-no suggest
ive detail which might help usThere is one thing
, said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coatpoc
ket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, bl
ue-tinted paper, helaid it out upon the table. I
 have some remembrance, said he, thaton the day 
when my uncle burned the papers I observed that 
the small,unburned margins which lay amid the as
hes were of this particularcolour. I found this 
single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I a
minclined to think that it may be one of the pap
ers which has, perhaps,fluttered out from among 
the others, and in that way has escapeddestructi
on. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see tha
t it helps usmuch. I think myself that it is a p
age from some private diary. Thewriting is undou
btedly my uncles.Holmes moved the lamp, and we b
oth bent over the sheet of paper, whichshowed by
 its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn fr
om a book. Itwas headed, March, 1869, and beneat
h were the following enigmaticalnotices4th. Huds
on came. Same old platform.7th. Set the pips on 
McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain of St.Augusti
ne.9th. McCauley cleared.10th. John Swain cleare
d.12th. Visited Paramore. All well.Thank you sai
d Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it 
to ourvisitor. And now you must on no account lo
se another instant. Wecannot spare time even to 
discuss what you have told me. You must gethome 
instantly and act.What shall I doThere is but on
e thing to do. It must be done at once. You must
 putthis piece of paper which you have shown us 
into the brass box whichyou have described. You 
must also put in a note to say that all theother
 papers were burned by your uncle, and that this
 is the only onewhich remains. You must assert t
hat in such words as will carryconviction with t
hem. Having done this, you must at once put the 
boxout upon the sundial, as directed. Do you und
erstandEntirely.Do not think of revenge, or anyt
hing of the sort, at present. I thinkthat we may
 gain that by means of the law; but we have our 
web toweave, while theirs is already woven. The 
first consideration is toremove the pressing dan
ger which threatens you. The second is to clearu
p the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.I
 thank you, said the young man, rising and pulli
ng on his overcoat.You have given me fresh life 
and hope. I shall certainly do as youadvise.Do n
ot lose an instant. And, above all, take care of
 yourself in themeanwhile, for I do not think th
at there can be a doubt that you arethreatened b
y a very real and imminent danger. How do you go
 backBy train from Waterloo.It is not yet nine. 
The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you
may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yours
elf too closely.I am armed.That is well. To-morr
ow I shall set to work upon your case.I shall se
e you at Horsham, thenNo, your secret lies in Lo
ndon. It is there that I shall seek it.Then I sh
all call upon you in a day, or in two days, with
 news as tothe box and the papers. I shall take 
your advice in every particular.He shook hands w
ith us and took his leave. Outside the wind stil
lscreamed and the rain splashed and pattered aga
inst the windows. Thisstrange, wild story seemed
 to have come to us from amid the madelements-bl
own in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gal
e-and now tohave been reabsorbed by them once mo
re.Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence,
 with his head sunkforward and his eyes bent upo
n the red glow of the fire. Then he lithis pipe,
 and leaning back in his chair he watched the bl
ue smoke-ringsas they chased each other up to th
e ceiling.I think, Watson, he remarked at last, 
that of all our cases we havehad none more fanta
stic than this.Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four.W
ell, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John
 Openshaw seems to meto be walking amid even gre
ater perils than did the Sholtos.But have you, I
 asked, formed any definite conception as to wha
tthese perils areThere can be no question as to 
their nature, he answered.Then what are they Who
 is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue thisun
happy familySherlock Holmes closed his eyes and 
placed his elbows upon the arms ofhis chair, wit
h his finger-tips together. The ideal reasoner, 
heremarked, would, when he had once been shown a
 single fact in all itsbearings, deduce from it 
not only all the chain of events which led upto 
it but also all the results which would follow f
rom it. As Cuviercould correctly describe a whol
e animal by the contemplation of asingle bone, s
o the observer who has thoroughly understood one
 link ina series of incidents should be able to 
accurately state all the otherones, both before 
and after. We have not yet grasped the results w
hichthe reason alone can attain to. Problems may
 be solved in the studywhich have baffled all th
ose who have sought a solution by the aid ofthei
r senses. To carry the art, however, to its high
est pitch, it isnecessary that the reasoner shou
ld be able to utilise all the factswhich have co
me to his knowledge; and this in itself implies,
 as youwill readily see, a possession of all kno
wledge, which, even in thesedays of free educati
on and encyclopdias, is a somewhat rareaccomplis
hment. It is not so impossible, however, that a 
man shouldpossess all knowledge which is likely 
to be useful to him in his work,and this I have 
endeavoured in my case to do. If I remember righ
tly,you on one occasion, in the early days of ou
r friendship, defined mylimits in a very precise
 fashion.Yes, I answered, laughing. It was a sin
gular document. Philosophy,astronomy, and politi
cs were marked at zero, I remember. Botanyvariab
le, geology profound as regards the mud-stains f
rom any regionwithin fifty miles of town, chemis
try eccentric, anatomy unsystematic,sensational 
literature and crime records unique, violin-play
er, boxer,swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner b
y cocaine and tobacco. Those, Ithink, were the m
ain points of my analysis.Holmes grinned at the 
last item. Well, he said, I say now, as I saidth
en, that a man should keep his little brain-atti
c stocked with allthe furniture that he is likel
y to use, and the rest he can put away inthe lum
ber-room of his library, where he can get it if 
he wants it.Now, for such a case as the one whic
h has been submitted to usto-night, we need cert
ainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand m
edown the letter K of the American Encyclopaedia
 which stands upon theshelf beside you. Thank yo
u. Now let us consider the situation and seewhat
 may be deduced from it. In the first place, we 
may start with astrong presumption that Colonel 
Openshaw had some very strong reasonfor leaving 
America. Men at his time of life do not change a
ll theirhabits and exchange willingly the charmi
ng climate of Florida for thelonely life of an E
nglish provincial town. His extreme love of soli
tudein England suggests the idea that he was in 
fear of someone orsomething, so we may assume as
 a working hypothesis that it was fear ofsomeone
 or something which drove him from America. As t
o what it was hefeared, we can only deduce that 
by considering the formidable letterswhich were 
received by himself and his successors. Did you 
remark thepostmarks of those lettersThe first wa
s from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and 
the thirdfrom London.From East London. What do y
ou deduce from thatThey are all seaports. That t
he writer was on board of a ship.Excellent. We h
ave already a clue. There can be no doubt that t
heprobability-the strong probability-is that the
 writer was on board of aship. And now let us co
nsider another point. In the case ofPondicherry,
 seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its 
fulfilment,in Dundee it was only some three or f
our days. Does that suggestanythingA greater dis
tance to travel.But the letter had also a greate
r distance to come.Then I do not see the point.T
here is at least a presumption that the vessel i
n which the man ormen are is a sailing-ship. It 
looks as if they always send theirsingular warni
ng or token before them when starting upon their
 mission.You see how quickly the deed followed t
he sign when it came fromDundee. If they had com
e from Pondicherry in a steamer they would havea
rrived almost as soon as their letter. But, as a
 matter of fact, sevenweeks elapsed. I think tha
t those seven weeks represented thedifference be
tween the mail-boat which brought the letter and
 thesailing vessel which brought the writer.It i
s possible.More than that. It is probable. And n
ow you see the deadly urgency ofthis new case, a
nd why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The bl
ow hasalways fallen at the end of the time which
 it would take the senders totravel the distance
. But this one comes from London, and therefore 
wecannot count upon delay.Good God I cried. What
 can it mean, this relentless persecutionThe pap
ers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vita
l importance tothe person or persons in the sail
ing-ship. I think that it is quiteclear that the
re must be more than one of them. A single man c
ould nothave carried out two deaths in such a wa
y as to deceive a coronersjury. There must have 
been several in it, and they must have been meno
f resource and determination. Their papers they 
mean to have, be theholder of them who it may. I
n this way you see K. K. K. ceases to bethe init
ials of an individual and becomes the badge of a
 society.But of what societyHave you never- said
 Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking hi
svoice-have you never heard of the Ku Klux KlanI
 never have.Holmes turned over the leaves of the
 book upon his knee. Here it is,said he presentl
yKu Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful 
resemblance to thesound produced by cocking a ri
fle. This terrible secret society wasformed by s
ome ex-Confederate soldiers in the Southern stat
es after theCivil War, and it rapidly formed loc
al branches in different parts ofthe country, no
tably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas, Ge
orgia,and Florida. Its power was used for politi
cal purposes, principally forthe terrorising of 
the negro voters and the murdering and driving f
romthe country of those who were opposed to its 
views. Its outrages wereusually preceded by a wa
rning sent to the marked man in some fantasticbu
t generally recognised shape-a sprig of oak-leav
es in some parts,melon seeds or orange pips in o
thers. On receiving this the victimmight either 
openly abjure his former ways, or might fly from
 thecountry. If he braved the matter out, death 
would unfailingly come uponhim, and usually in s
ome strange and unforeseen manner. So perfect wa
sthe organisation of the society, and so systema
tic its methods, thatthere is hardly a case upon
 record where any man succeeded in bravingit wit
h impunity, or in which any of its outrages were
 traced home tothe perpetrators. For some years 
the organisation flourished in spiteof the effor
ts of the United States government and of the be
tterclasses of the community in the South. Event
ually, in the year 1869,the movement rather sudd
enly collapsed, although there have beensporadic
 outbreaks of the same sort since that date.You 
will observe, said Holmes, laying down the volum
e, that thesudden breaking up of the society was
 coincident with the disappearanceof Openshaw fr
om America with their papers. It may well have b
een causeand effect. It is no wonder that he and
 his family have some of themore implacable spir
its upon their track. You can understand that th
isregister and diary may implicate some of the f
irst men in the South,and that there may be many
 who will not sleep easy at night until it isrec
overed.Then the page we have seen-Is such as we 
might expect. It ran, if I remember right, sent 
thepips to A, B, and C-that is, sent the society
s warning to them. Thenthere are successive entr
ies that A and B cleared, or left the country,an
d finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a si
nister result for C.Well, I think, Doctor, that 
we may let some light into this dark place,and I
 believe that the only chance young Openshaw has
 in the meantimeis to do what I have told him. T
here is nothing more to be said or tobe done to-
night, so hand me over my violin and let us try 
to forgetfor half an hour the miserable weather 
and the still more miserableways of our fellow m
en.It had cleared in the morning, and the sun wa
s shining with a subduedbrightness through the d
im veil which hangs over the great city.Sherlock
 Holmes was already at breakfast when I came dow
n.You will excuse me for not waiting for you, sa
id he; I have, Iforesee, a very busy day before 
me in looking into this case of youngOpenshaws.W
hat steps will you take I asked.It will very muc
h depend upon the results of my first inquiries.
 I mayhave to go down to Horsham, after all.You 
will not go there firstNo, I shall commence with
 the City. Just ring the bell and the maidwill b
ring up your coffee.As I waited, I lifted the un
opened newspaper from the table and glancedmy ey
e over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a
 chill to myheart.Holmes, I cried, you are too l
ate.Ah said he, laying down his cup, I feared as
 much. How was itdone He spoke calmly, but I cou
ld see that he was deeply moved.My eye caught th
e name of Openshaw, and the heading Tragedy Near
Waterloo Bridge. Here is the accountBetween nine
 and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of th
e HDivision, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard
 a cry for help and asplash in the water. The ni
ght, however, was extremely dark and stormy,so t
hat, in spite of the help of several passers-by,
 it was quiteimpossible to effect a rescue. The 
alarm, however, was given, and, bythe aid of the
 water-police, the body was eventually recovered
. Itproved to be that of a young gentleman whose
 name, as it appears froman envelope which was f
ound in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose
residence is near Horsham. It is conjectured tha
t he may have beenhurrying down to catch the las
t train from Waterloo Station, and thatin his ha
ste and the extreme darkness he missed his path 
and walkedover the edge of one of the small land
ing-places for river steamboats.The body exhibit
ed no traces of violence, and there can be no do
ubtthat the deceased had been the victim of an u
nfortunate accident, whichshould have the effect
 of calling the attention of the authorities tot
he condition of the riverside landing-stages.We 
sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more dep
ressed and shakenthan I had ever seen him.That h
urts my pride, Watson, he said at last. It is a 
petty feeling,no doubt, but it hurts my pride. I
t becomes a personal matter with menow, and, if 
God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon th
is gang.That he should come to me for help, and 
that I should send him away tohis death- He spra
ng from his chair and paced about the room inunc
ontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sal
low cheeks and anervous clasping and unclasping 
of his long thin hands.They must be cunning devi
ls, he exclaimed at last. How could theyhave dec
oyed him down there The Embankment is not on the
 direct lineto the station. The bridge, no doubt
, was too crowded, even on such anight, for thei
r purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will w
in inthe long run. I am going out nowTo the poli
ceNo; I shall be my own police. When I have spun
 the web they may takethe flies, but not before.
All day I was engaged in my professional work, a
nd it was late in theevening before I returned t
o Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not comeback
 yet. It was nearly ten oclock before he entered
, looking pale andworn. He walked up to the side
board, and tearing a piece from the loafhe devou
red it voraciously, washing it down with a long 
draught ofwater.You are hungry, I remarked.Starv
ing. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothin
g sincebreakfast.NothingNot a bite. I had no tim
e to think of it.And how have you succeededWell.
You have a clueI have them in the hollow of my h
and. Young Openshaw shall not longremain unaveng
ed. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish t
rade-markupon them. It is well thought ofWhat do
 you meanHe took an orange from the cupboard, an
d tearing it to pieces hesqueezed out the pips u
pon the table. Of these he took five and thrustt
hem into an envelope. On the inside of the flap 
he wrote S. H. for J.O. Then he sealed it and ad
dressed it to Captain James Calhoun,Barque Lone 
Star, Savannah, Georgia.That will await him when
 he enters port, said he, chuckling. It maygive 
him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a
 precursor of hisfate as Openshaw did before him
.And who is this Captain CalhounThe leader of th
e gang. I shall have the others, but he first.Ho
w did you trace it, thenHe took a large sheet of
 paper from his pocket, all covered with datesan
d names.I have spent the whole day, said he, ove
r Lloyds registers andfiles of the old papers, f
ollowing the future career of every vesselwhich 
touched at Pondicherry in January and February i
n 83. There werethirty-six ships of fair tonnage
 which were reported there during thosemonths. O
f these, one, the Lone Star, instantly attracted
 myattention, since, although it was reported as
 having cleared fromLondon, the name is that whi
ch is given to one of the states of theUnion.Tex
as, I think.I was not and am not sure which; but
 I knew that the ship must have anAmerican origi
n.What thenI searched the Dundee records, and wh
en I found that the barque LoneStar was there in
 January, 85, my suspicion became a certainty. I
then inquired as to the vessels which lay at pre
sent in the port ofLondon.YesThe Lone Star had a
rrived here last week. I went down to the Albert
Dock and found that she had been taken down the 
river by the early tidethis morning, homeward bo
und to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend andlearned
 that she had passed some time ago, and as the w
ind is easterlyI have no doubt that she is now p
ast the Goodwins and not very far fromthe Isle o
f Wight.What will you do, thenOh, I have my hand
 upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn,
 theonly native-born Americans in the ship. The 
others are Finns andGermans. I know, also, that 
they were all three away from the ship lastnight
. I had it from the stevedore who has been loadi
ng their cargo. Bythe time that their sailing-sh
ip reaches Savannah the mail-boat willhave carri
ed this letter, and the cable will have informed
 the policeof Savannah that these three gentleme
n are badly wanted here upon acharge of murder.T
here is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid o
f human plans, and themurderers of John Openshaw
 were never to receive the orange pips whichwoul
d show them that another, as cunning and as reso
lute as themselves,was upon their track. Very lo
ng and very severe were the equinoctialgales tha
t year. We waited long for news of the Lone Star
 ofSavannah, but none ever reached us. We did at
 last hear that somewherefar out in the Atlantic
 a shattered stern-post of a boat was seenswingi
ng in the trough of a wave, with the letters L. 
S. carved uponit, and that is all which we shall
 ever know of the fate of the LoneStar.VI. THE M
AN WITH THE TWISTED LIPIsa Whitney, brother of t
he late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of theThe
ological College of St. Georges, was much addict
ed to opium. Thehabit grew upon him, as I unders
tand, from some foolish freak when hewas at coll
ege; for having read De Quinceys description of 
his dreamsand sensations, he had drenched his to
bacco with laudanum in an attemptto produce the 
same effects. He found, as so many more have don
e, thatthe practice is easier to attain than to 
get rid of, and for many yearshe continued to be
 a slave to the drug, an object of mingled horro
r andpity to his friends and relatives. I can se
e him now, with yellow,pasty face, drooping lids
, and pin-point pupils, all huddled in achair, t
he wreck and ruin of a noble man.One night-it wa
s in June, 89-there came a ring to my bell, abou
t thehour when a man gives his first yawn and gl
ances at the clock. I sat upin my chair, and my 
wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and ma
dea little face of disappointment.A patient said
 she. Youll have to go out.I groaned, for I was 
newly come back from a weary day.We heard the do
or open, a few hurried words, and then quick ste
ps uponthe linoleum. Our own door flew open, and
 a lady, clad in somedark-coloured stuff, with a
 black veil, entered the room.You will excuse my
 calling so late, she began, and then, suddenlyl
osing her self-control, she ran forward, threw h
er arms about mywifes neck, and sobbed upon her 
shoulder. Oh, Im in such troubleshe cried; I do 
so want a little help.Why, said my wife, pulling
 up her veil, it is Kate Whitney. How youstartle
d me, Kate I had not an idea who you were when y
ou came in.I didnt know what to do, so I came st
raight to you. That was alwaysthe way. Folk who 
were in grief came to my wife like birds to alig
hthouse.It was very sweet of you to come. Now, y
ou must have some wine andwater, and sit here co
mfortably and tell us all about it. Or should yo
urather that I sent James off to bedOh, no, no I
 want the doctors advice and help, too. Its abou
t Isa.He has not been home for two days. I am so
 frightened about himIt was not the first time t
hat she had spoken to us of her husbandstrouble,
 to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend 
and schoolcompanion. We soothed and comforted he
r by such words as we could find.Did she know wh
ere her husband was Was it possible that we coul
d bringhim back to herIt seems that it was. She 
had the surest information that of late hehad, w
hen the fit was on him, made use of an opium den
 in the farthesteast of the City. Hitherto his o
rgies had always been confined to oneday, and he
 had come back, twitching and shattered, in the 
evening. Butnow the spell had been upon him eigh
t-and-forty hours, and he laythere, doubtless am
ong the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poi
sonor sleeping off the effects. There he was to 
be found, she was sure ofit, at the Bar of Gold,
 in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she to doHo
w could she, a young and timid woman, make her w
ay into such a placeand pluck her husband out fr
om among the ruffians who surrounded himThere wa
s the case, and of course there was but one way 
out of it.Might I not escort her to this place A
nd then, as a second thought,why should she come
 at all I was Isa Whitneys medical adviser, and 
assuch I had influence over him. I could manage 
it better if I werealone. I promised her on my w
ord that I would send him home in a cabwithin tw
o hours if he were indeed at the address which s
he had givenme. And so in ten minutes I had left
 my armchair and cheerysitting-room behind me, a
nd was speeding eastward in a hansom on astrange
 errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though 
the future onlycould show how strange it was to 
be.But there was no great difficulty in the firs
t stage of my adventure.Upper Swandam Lane is a 
vile alley lurking behind the high wharveswhich 
line the north side of the river to the east of 
London Bridge.Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop
, approached by a steep flight ofsteps leading d
own to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I f
ound theden of which I was in search. Ordering m
y cab to wait, I passed downthe steps, worn holl
ow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunk
enfeet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lam
p above the door I foundthe latch and made my wa
y into a long, low room, thick and heavy withthe
 brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden ber
ths, like theforecastle of an emigrant ship.Thro
ugh the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of
 bodies lying instrange fantastic poses, bowed s
houlders, bent knees, heads thrownback, and chin
s pointing upward, with here and there a dark,la
ck-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of t
he black shadowsthere glimmered little red circl
es of light, now bright, now faint, asthe burnin
g poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the meta
l pipes. Themost lay silent, but some muttered t
o themselves, and others talkedtogether in a str
ange, low, monotonous voice, their conversation 
comingin gushes, and then suddenly tailing off i
nto silence, each mumblingout his own thoughts a
nd paying little heed to the words of hisneighbo
ur. At the farther end was a small brazier of bu
rning charcoal,beside which on a three-legged wo
oden stool there sat a tall, thin oldman, with h
is jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbow
s upon hisknees, staring into the fire.As I ente
red, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up wit
h a pipe forme and a supply of the drug, beckoni
ng me to an empty berth.Thank you. I have not co
me to stay, said I. There is a friend ofmine her
e, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him
.There was a movement and an exclamation from my
 right, and peeringthrough the gloom, I saw Whit
ney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staringout at m
e.My God Its Watson, said he. He was in a pitiab
le state of reaction,with every nerve in a twitt
er. I say, Watson, what oclock is itNearly eleve
n.Of what dayOf Friday, June 19th.Good heavens I
 thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What
 dyouwant to frighten a chap for He sank his fac
e onto his arms and beganto sob in a high treble
 key.I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wif
e has been waiting this twodays for you. You sho
uld be ashamed of yourselfSo I am. But youve got
 mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a fewh
ours, three pipes, four pipes-I forget how many.
 But Ill go home withyou. I wouldnt frighten Kat
e-poor little Kate. Give me your hand Haveyou a 
cabYes, I have one waiting.Then I shall go in it
. But I must owe something. Find what I owe,Wats
on. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for my
self.I walked down the narrow passage between th
e double row of sleepers,holding my breath to ke
ep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug,an
d looking about for the manager. As I passed the
 tall man who sat bythe brazier I felt a sudden 
pluck at my skirt, and a low voicewhispered, Wal
k past me, and then look back at me. The words f
ellquite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down.
 They could only have comefrom the old man at my
 side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever,ve
ry thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium 
pipe dangling downfrom between his knees, as tho
ugh it had dropped in sheer lassitudefrom his fi
ngers. I took two steps forward and looked back.
 It took allmy self-control to prevent me from b
reaking out into a cry ofastonishment. He had tu
rned his back so that none could see him but I.H
is form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, 
the dull eyes hadregained their fire, and there,
 sitting by the fire and grinning at mysurprise,
 was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He made a 
slight motionto me to approach him, and instantl
y, as he turned his face half roundto the compan
y once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-li
ppedsenility.Holmes I whispered, what on earth a
re you doing in this denAs low as you can, he an
swered; I have excellent ears. If you wouldhave 
the great kindness to get rid of that sottish fr
iend of yours Ishould be exceedingly glad to hav
e a little talk with you.I have a cab outside.Th
en pray send him home in it. You may safely trus
t him, for heappears to be too limp to get into 
any mischief. I should recommend youalso to send
 a note by the cabman to your wife to say that y
ou havethrown in your lot with me. If you will w
ait outside, I shall be withyou in five minutes.
It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holme
s requests, for theywere always so exceedingly d
efinite, and put forward with such a quietair of
 mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was
 once confined inthe cab my mission was practica
lly accomplished; and for the rest, Icould not w
ish anything better than to be associated with m
y friend inone of those singular adventures whic
h were the normal condition of hisexistence. In 
a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitne
ys bill,led him out to the cab, and seen him dri
ven through the darkness. In avery short time a 
decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den, 
and Iwas walking down the street with Sherlock H
olmes. For two streets heshuffled along with a b
ent back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancingqu
ickly round, he straightened himself out and bur
st into a hearty fitof laughter.I suppose, Watso
n, said he, that you imagine that I have addedop
ium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the o
ther littleweaknesses on which you have favoured
 me with your medical views.I was certainly surp
rised to find you there.But not more so than I t
o find you.I came to find a friend.And I to find
 an enemy.An enemyYes; one of my natural enemies
, or, shall I say, my natural prey.Briefly, Wats
on, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inqui
ry, and Ihave hoped to find a clue in the incohe
rent ramblings of these sots, asI have done befo
re now. Had I been recognised in that den my lif
e wouldnot have been worth an hours purchase; fo
r I have used it before nowfor my own purposes, 
and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to
have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at 
the back of thatbuilding, near the corner of Pau
ls Wharf, which could tell somestrange tales of 
what has passed through it upon the moonless nig
hts.What You do not mean bodiesAy, bodies, Watso
n. We should be rich men if we had  1000 for eve
rypoor devil who has been done to death in that 
den. It is the vilestmurder-trap on the whole ri
verside, and I fear that Neville St. Clairhas en
tered it never to leave it more. But our trap sh
ould be here. Heput his two forefingers between 
his teeth and whistled shrilly-a signalwhich was
 answered by a similar whistle from the distance
, followedshortly by the rattle of wheels and th
e clink of horses hoofs.Now, Watson, said Holmes
, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through thegloom,
 throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light
 from its sidelanterns. Youll come with me, wont
 youIf I can be of use.Oh, a trusty comrade is a
lways of use; and a chronicler still more so.My 
room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one.The Ce
darsYes; that is Mr. St. Clairs house. I am stay
ing there while I conductthe inquiry.Where is it
, thenNear Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile dr
ive before us.But I am all in the dark.Of course
 you are. Youll know all about it presently. Jum
p up here.All right, John; we shall not need you
. Heres half a crown. Look outfor me to-morrow, 
about eleven. Give her her head. So long, thenHe
 flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed 
away through theendless succession of sombre and
 deserted streets, which widenedgradually, until
 we were flying across a broad balustraded bridg
e, withthe murky river flowing sluggishly beneat
h us. Beyond lay another dullwilderness of brick
s and mortar, its silence broken only by the hea
vy,regular footfall of the policeman, or the son
gs and shouts of somebelated party of revellers.
 A dull wrack was drifting slowly across thesky,
 and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there
 through the riftsof the clouds. Holmes drove in
 silence, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, and
 the air of a man who is lost in thought, while 
I sat besidehim, curious to learn what this new 
quest might be which seemed to taxhis powers so 
sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the curr
ent ofhis thoughts. We had driven several miles,
 and were beginning to get tothe fringe of the b
elt of suburban villas, when he shook himself,sh
rugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with t
he air of a man whohas satisfied himself that he
 is acting for the best.You have a grand gift of
 silence, Watson, said he. It makes youquite inv
aluable as a companion. Pon my word, it is a gre
at thing forme to have someone to talk to, for m
y own thoughts are notover-pleasant. I was wonde
ring what I should say to this dear littlewoman 
to-night when she meets me at the door.You forge
t that I know nothing about it.I shall just have
 time to tell you the facts of the case before w
e getto Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, 
somehow I can get nothing togo upon. Theres plen
ty of thread, no doubt, but I cant get the end o
fit into my hand. Now, Ill state the case clearl
y and concisely to you,Watson, and maybe you can
 see a spark where all is dark to me.Proceed, th
en.Some years ago-to be definite, in May, 1884-t
here came to Lee agentleman, Neville St. Clair b
y name, who appeared to have plenty ofmoney. He 
took a large villa, laid out the grounds very ni
cely, andlived generally in good style. By degre
es he made friends in theneighbourhood, and in 1
887 he married the daughter of a local brewer,by
 whom he now has two children. He had no occupat
ion, but wasinterested in several companies and 
went into town as a rule in themorning, returnin
g by the 514 from Cannon Street every night. Mr.
 St.Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a
 man of temperate habits, agood husband, a very 
affectionate father, and a man who is popular wi
thall who know him. I may add that his whole deb
ts at the present moment,as far as we have been 
able to ascertain, amount to  88 10s., whilehe h
as  220 standing to his credit in the Capital an
d Counties Bank.There is no reason, therefore, t
o think that money troubles have beenweighing up
on his mind.Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair we
nt into town rather earlier thanusual, remarking
 before he started that he had two importantcomm
issions to perform, and that he would bring his 
little boy home abox of bricks. Now, by the mere
st chance, his wife received a telegramupon this
 same Monday, very shortly after his departure, 
to the effectthat a small parcel of considerable
 value which she had been expectingwas waiting f
or her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping C
ompany.Now, if you are well up in your London, y
ou will know that the officeof the company is in
 Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swan
damLane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. C
lair had her lunch,started for the City, did som
e shopping, proceeded to the companysoffice, got
 her packet, and found herself at exactly 435 wa
lkingthrough Swandam Lane on her way back to the
 station. Have you followedme so farIt is very c
lear.If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly 
hot day, and Mrs. St. Clairwalked slowly, glanci
ng about in the hope of seeing a cab, as she did
not like the neighbourhood in which she found he
rself. While she waswalking in this way down Swa
ndam Lane, she suddenly heard anejaculation or c
ry, and was struck cold to see her husband looki
ng downat her and, as it seemed to her, beckonin
g to her from a second-floorwindow. The window w
as open, and she distinctly saw his face, which 
shedescribes as being terribly agitated. He wave
d his hands frantically toher, and then vanished
 from the window so suddenly that it seemed tohe
r that he had been plucked back by some irresist
ible force frombehind. One singular point which 
struck her quick feminine eye was thatalthough h
e wore some dark coat, such as he had started to
 town in, hehad on neither collar nor necktie.Co
nvinced that something was amiss with him, she r
ushed down thesteps-for the house was none other
 than the opium den in which youfound me to-nigh
t-and running through the front room she attempt
ed toascend the stairs which led to the first fl
oor. At the foot of thestairs, however, she met 
this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken,who 
thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts a
s assistant there,pushed her out into the street
. Filled with the most maddening doubtsand fears
, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-for
tune, met inFresno Street a number of constables
 with an inspector, all on theirway to their bea
t. The inspector and two men accompanied her bac
k, andin spite of the continued resistance of th
e proprietor, they made theirway to the room in 
which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There wa
s nosign of him there. In fact, in the whole of 
that floor there was no oneto be found save a cr
ippled wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems,m
ade his home there. Both he and the Lascar stout
ly swore that no oneelse had been in the front r
oom during the afternoon. So determined wastheir
 denial that the inspector was staggered, and ha
d almost come tobelieve that Mrs. St. Clair had 
been deluded when, with a cry, shesprang at a sm
all deal box which lay upon the table and tore t
he lidfrom it. Out there fell a cascade of child
rens bricks. It was the toywhich he had promised
 to bring home.This discovery, and the evident c
onfusion which the cripple showed,made the inspe
ctor realise that the matter was serious. The ro
oms werecarefully examined, and results all poin
ted to an abominable crime. Thefront room was pl
ainly furnished as a sitting-room and led into a
 smallbedroom, which looked out upon the back of
 one of the wharves. Betweenthe wharf and the be
droom window is a narrow strip, which is dry at 
lowtide but is covered at high tide with at leas
t four and a half feet ofwater. The bedroom wind
ow was a broad one and opened from below. Onexam
ination traces of blood were to be seen upon the
 windowsill, andseveral scattered drops were vis
ible upon the wooden floor of thebedroom. Thrust
 away behind a curtain in the front room were al
l theclothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the 
exception of his coat. Hisboots, his socks, his 
hat, and his watch-all were there. There were no
signs of violence upon any of these garments, an
d there were no othertraces of Mr. Neville St. C
lair. Out of the window he must apparentlyhave g
one for no other exit could be discovered, and t
he ominousbloodstains upon the sill gave little 
promise that he could savehimself by swimming, f
or the tide was at its very highest at the momen
tof the tragedy.And now as to the villains who s
eemed to be immediately implicated inthe matter.
 The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest 
antecedents,but as, by Mrs. St. Clairs story, he
 was known to have been at thefoot of the stair 
within a very few seconds of her husbands appear
anceat the window, he could hardly have been mor
e than an accessory to thecrime. His defence was
 one of absolute ignorance, and he protested tha
the had no knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Bo
one, his lodger, andthat he could not account in
 any way for the presence of the missinggentlema
ns clothes.So much for the Lascar manager. Now f
or the sinister cripple who livesupon the second
 floor of the opium den, and who was certainly t
he lasthuman being whose eyes rested upon Nevill
e St. Clair. His name is HughBoone, and his hide
ous face is one which is familiar to every man w
hogoes much to the City. He is a professional be
ggar, though in order toavoid the police regulat
ions he pretends to a small trade in waxvestas. 
Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, u
pon theleft-hand side, there is, as you may have
 remarked, a small angle inthe wall. Here it is 
that this creature takes his daily seat,cross-le
gged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, 
and as he is apiteous spectacle a small rain of 
charity descends into the greasyleather cap whic
h lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watc
hed thefellow more than once before ever I thoug
ht of making his professionalacquaintance, and I
 have been surprised at the harvest which he has
reaped in a short time. His appearance, you see,
 is so remarkable thatno one can pass him withou
t observing him. A shock of orange hair, apale f
ace disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its
 contraction, hasturned up the outer edge of his
 upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a pairof very pe
netrating dark eyes, which present a singular co
ntrast to thecolour of his hair, all mark him ou
t from amid the common crowd ofmendicants and so
, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a
 replyto any piece of chaff which may be thrown 
at him by the passers-by.This is the man whom we
 now learn to have been the lodger at the opiumd
en, and to have been the last man to see the gen
tleman of whom we arein quest.But a cripple said
 I. What could he have done single-handed agains
ta man in the prime of lifeHe is a cripple in th
e sense that he walks with a limp; but in otherr
espects he appears to be a powerful and well-nur
tured man. Surely yourmedical experience would t
ell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb isoft
en compensated for by exceptional strength in th
e others.Pray continue your narrative.Mrs. St. C
lair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon 
the window,and she was escorted home in a cab by
 the police, as her presence couldbe of no help 
to them in their investigations. Inspector Barto
n, whohad charge of the case, made a very carefu
l examination of thepremises, but without findin
g anything which threw any light upon thematter.
 One mistake had been made in not arresting Boon
e instantly, ashe was allowed some few minutes d
uring which he might have communicatedwith his f
riend the Lascar, but this fault was soon remedi
ed, and hewas seized and searched, without anyth
ing being found which couldincriminate him. Ther
e were, it is true, some blood-stains upon hisri
ght shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-fin
ger, which had beencut near the nail, and explai
ned that the bleeding came from there,adding tha
t he had been to the window not long before, and
 that thestains which had been observed there ca
me doubtless from the samesource. He denied stre
nuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clairan
d swore that the presence of the clothes in his 
room was as much amystery to him as to the polic
e. As to Mrs. St. Clairs assertion thatshe had a
ctually seen her husband at the window, he decla
red that shemust have been either mad or dreamin
g. He was removed, loudlyprotesting, to the poli
ce-station, while the inspector remained uponthe
 premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might
 afford some freshclue.And it did, though they h
ardly found upon the mud-bank what they hadfeare
d to find. It was Neville St. Clairs coat, and n
ot Neville St.Clair, which lay uncovered as the 
tide receded. And what do you thinkthey found in
 the pocketsI cannot imagine.No, I dont think yo
u would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies
and half-pennies-421 pennies and 270 half-pennie
s. It was no wonderthat it had not been swept aw
ay by the tide. But a human body is adifferent m
atter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf 
and thehouse. It seemed likely enough that the w
eighted coat had remained whenthe stripped body 
had been sucked away into the river.But I unders
tand that all the other clothes were found in th
e room.Would the body be dressed in a coat alone
No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously e
nough. Suppose thatthis man Boone had thrust Nev
ille St. Clair through the window, thereis no hu
man eye which could have seen the deed. What wou
ld he do thenIt would of course instantly strike
 him that he must get rid of thetell-tale garmen
ts. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the
 act ofthrowing it out, when it would occur to h
im that it would swim and notsink. He has little
 time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs w
henthe wife tried to force her way up, and perha
ps he has already heardfrom his Lascar confedera
te that the police are hurrying up the street.Th
ere is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to s
ome secret hoard,where he has accumulated the fr
uits of his beggary, and he stuffs allthe coins 
upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets
 to make sureof the coats sinking. He throws it 
out, and would have done the samewith the other 
garments had not he heard the rush of steps belo
w, andonly just had time to close the window whe
n the police appeared.It certainly sounds feasib
le.Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis
 for want of a better.Boone, as I have told you,
 was arrested and taken to the station, butit co
uld not be shown that there had ever before been
 anything againsthim. He had for years been know
n as a professional beggar, but his lifeappeared
 to have been a very quiet and innocent one. The
re the matterstands at present, and the question
s which have to be solved-whatNeville St. Clair 
was doing in the opium den, what happened to him
 whenthere, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone
 had to do with hisdisappearance-are all as far 
from a solution as ever. I confess that Icannot 
recall any case within my experience which looke
d at the firstglance so simple and yet which pre
sented such difficulties.While Sherlock Holmes h
ad been detailing this singular series ofevents,
 we had been whirling through the outskirts of t
he great townuntil the last straggling houses ha
d been left behind, and we rattledalong with a c
ountry hedge upon either side of us. Just as he 
finished,however, we drove through two scattered
 villages, where a few lightsstill glimmered in 
the windows.We are on the outskirts of Lee, said
 my companion. We have touchedon three English c
ounties in our short drive, starting in Middlese
x,passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in
 Kent. See that lightamong the trees That is The
 Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a womanwhose 
anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, 
caught the clinkof our horses feet.But why are y
ou not conducting the case from Baker Street I a
sked.Because there are many inquiries which must
 be made out here. Mrs. St.Clair has most kindly
 put two rooms at my disposal, and you may resta
ssured that she will have nothing but a welcome 
for my friend andcolleague. I hate to meet her, 
Watson, when I have no news of herhusband. Here 
we are. Whoa, there, whoaWe had pulled up in fro
nt of a large villa which stood within its owngr
ounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horses he
ad, and springingdown, I followed Holmes up the 
small, winding gravel-drive which led tothe hous
e. As we approached, the door flew open, and a l
ittle blondewoman stood in the opening, clad in 
some sort of light mousseline desoie, with a tou
ch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists
. Shestood with her figure outlined against the 
flood of light, one handupon the door, one half-
raised in her eagerness, her body slightlybent, 
her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and
 parted lips, astanding question.Well she cried,
 well And then, seeing that there were two of us
,she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan 
as she saw that mycompanion shook his head and s
hrugged his shoulders.No good newsNone.No badNo.
Thank God for that. But come in. You must be wea
ry, for you have had along day.This is my friend
, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to m
e inseveral of my cases, and a lucky chance has 
made it possible for me tobring him out and asso
ciate him with this investigation.I am delighted
 to see you, said she, pressing my hand warmly. 
Youwill, I am sure, forgive anything that may be
 wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider t
he blow which has come so suddenlyupon us.My dea
r madam, said I, I am an old campaigner, and if 
I were not Ican very well see that no apology is
 needed. If I can be of anyassistance, either to
 you or to my friend here, I shall be indeedhapp
y.Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, said the lady as we 
entered a well-litdining-room, upon the table of
 which a cold supper had been laid out,I should 
very much like to ask you one or two plain quest
ions, towhich I beg that you will give a plain a
nswer.Certainly, madam.Do not trouble about my f
eelings. I am not hysterical, nor given tofainti
ng. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinio
n.Upon what pointIn your heart of hearts, do you
 think that Neville is aliveSherlock Holmes seem
ed to be embarrassed by the question. Frankly,no
w she repeated, standing upon the rug and lookin
g keenly down athim as he leaned back in a baske
t-chair.Frankly, then, madam, I do not.You think
 that he is deadI do.MurderedI dont say that. Pe
rhaps.And on what day did he meet his deathOn Mo
nday.Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good 
enough to explain how it isthat I have received 
a letter from him to-day.Sherlock Holmes sprang 
out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.Wh
at he roared.Yes, to-day. She stood smiling, hol
ding up a little slip of paper inthe air.May I s
ee itCertainly.He snatched it from her in his ea
gerness, and smoothing it out upon thetable he d
rew over the lamp and examined it intently. I ha
d left mychair and was gazing at it over his sho
ulder. The envelope was a verycoarse one and was
 stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with th
edate of that very day, or rather of the day bef
ore, for it wasconsiderably after midnight.Coars
e writing, murmured Holmes. Surely this is not y
our husbandswriting, madam.No, but the enclosure
 is.I perceive also that whoever addressed the e
nvelope had to go andinquire as to the address.H
ow can you tell thatThe name, you see, is in per
fectly black ink, which has dried itself.The res
t is of the greyish colour, which shows that blo
tting-paper hasbeen used. If it had been written
 straight off, and then blotted, nonewould be of
 a deep black shade. This man has written the na
me, andthere has then been a pause before he wro
te the address, which can onlymean that he was n
ot familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle,
 butthere is nothing so important as trifles. Le
t us now see the letter.Ha there has been an enc
losure hereYes, there was a ring. His signet-rin
g.And you are sure that this is your husbands ha
ndOne of his hands.OneHis hand when he wrote hur
riedly. It is very unlike his usual writing,and 
yet I know it well.Dearest do not be frightened.
 All will come well. There is a hugeerror which 
it may take some little time to rectify. Wait in
patience.-NEVILLE. Written in pencil upon the fl
y-leaf of a book,octavo size, no water-mark. Hum
 Posted to-day in Gravesend by a manwith a dirty
 thumb. Ha And the flap has been gummed, if I am
 not verymuch in error, by a person who had been
 chewing tobacco. And you haveno doubt that it i
s your husbands hand, madamNone. Neville wrote t
hose words.And they were posted to-day at Graves
end. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, theclouds lighten, th
ough I should not venture to say that the danger
 isover.But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes.Unless 
this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong 
scent. Thering, after all, proves nothing. It ma
y have been taken from him.No, no; it is, it is 
his very own writingVery well. It may, however, 
have been written on Monday and onlyposted to-da
y.That is possible.If so, much may have happened
 between.Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Hol
mes. I know that all is wellwith him. There is s
o keen a sympathy between us that I should know 
ifevil came upon him. On the very day that I saw
 him last he cut himselfin the bedroom, and yet 
I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantlywi
th the utmost certainty that something had happe
ned. Do you thinkthat I would respond to such a 
trifle and yet be ignorant of hisdeathI have see
n too much not to know that the impression of a 
woman may bemore valuable than the conclusion of
 an analytical reasoner. And inthis letter you c
ertainly have a very strong piece of evidence to
corroborate your view. But if your husband is al
ive and able to writeletters, why should he rema
in away from youI cannot imagine. It is unthinka
ble.And on Monday he made no remarks before leav
ing youNo.And you were surprised to see him in S
wandam LaneVery much so.Was the window openYes.T
hen he might have called to youHe might.He only,
 as I understand, gave an inarticulate cryYes.A 
call for help, you thoughtYes. He waved his hand
s.But it might have been a cry of surprise. Asto
nishment at theunexpected sight of you might cau
se him to throw up his handsIt is possible.And y
ou thought he was pulled backHe disappeared so s
uddenly.He might have leaped back. You did not s
ee anyone else in the roomNo, but this horrible 
man confessed to having been there, and theLasca
r was at the foot of the stairs.Quite so. Your h
usband, as far as you could see, had his ordinar
yclothes onBut without his collar or tie. I dist
inctly saw his bare throat.Had he ever spoken of
 Swandam LaneNever.Had he ever showed any signs 
of having taken opiumNever.Thank you, Mrs. St. C
lair. Those are the principal points about which
I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now ha
ve a little supper andthen retire, for we may ha
ve a very busy day to-morrow.A large and comfort
able double-bedded room had been placed at ourdi
sposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, fo
r I was weary aftermy night of adventure. Sherlo
ck Holmes was a man, however, who, when hehad an
 unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for da
ys, and even fora week, without rest, turning it
 over, rearranging his facts, lookingat it from 
every point of view until he had either fathomed
 it orconvinced himself that his data were insuf
ficient. It was soon evidentto me that he was no
w preparing for an all-night sitting. He took of
fhis coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dre
ssing-gown, and thenwandered about the room coll
ecting pillows from his bed and cushionsfrom the
 sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a
 sort ofEastern divan, upon which he perched him
self cross-legged, with anounce of shag tobacco 
and a box of matches laid out in front of him. I
nthe dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting the
re, an old briar pipebetween his lips, his eyes 
fixed vacantly upon the corner of theceiling, th
e blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motion
less, withthe light shining upon his strong-set 
aquiline features. So he sat as Idropped off to 
sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation c
aused meto wake up, and I found the summer sun s
hining into the apartment. Thepipe was still bet
ween his lips, the smoke still curled upward, an
d theroom was full of a dense tobacco haze, but 
nothing remained of the heapof shag which I had 
seen upon the previous night.Awake, Watson he as
ked.Yes.Game for a morning driveCertainly.Then d
ress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where t
he stable-boysleeps, and we shall soon have the 
trap out. He chuckled to himself ashe spoke, his
 eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to
 thesombre thinker of the previous night.As I dr
essed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder th
at no one wasstirring. It was twenty-five minute
s past four. I had hardly finishedwhen Holmes re
turned with the news that the boy was putting in
 thehorse.I want to test a little theory of mine
, said he, pulling on hisboots. I think, Watson,
 that you are now standing in the presence ofone
 of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve
 to be kicked fromhere to Charing Cross. But I t
hink I have the key of the affair now.And where 
is it I asked, smiling.In the bathroom, he answe
red. Oh, yes, I am not joking, hecontinued, seei
ng my look of incredulity. I have just been ther
e, andI have taken it out, and I have got it in 
this Gladstone bag. Come on,my boy, and we shall
 see whether it will not fit the lock.We made ou
r way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out
 into thebright morning sunshine. In the road st
ood our horse and trap, with thehalf-clad stable
-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, and
 awaywe dashed down the London Road. A few count
ry carts were stirring,bearing in vegetables to 
the metropolis, but the lines of villas oneither
 side were as silent and lifeless as some city i
n a dream.It has been in some points a singular 
case, said Holmes, flicking thehorse on into a g
allop. I confess that I have been as blind as a 
mole,but it is better to learn wisdom late than 
never to learn it at all.In town the earliest ri
sers were just beginning to look sleepily fromth
eir windows as we drove through the streets of t
he Surrey side.Passing down the Waterloo Bridge 
Road we crossed over the river, anddashing up We
llington Street wheeled sharply to the right and
 foundourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes w
as well known to the force,and the two constable
s at the door saluted him. One of them held theh
orses head while the other led us in.Who is on d
uty asked Holmes.Inspector Bradstreet, sir.Ah, B
radstreet, how are you A tall, stout official ha
d come down thestone-flagged passage, in a peake
d cap and frogged jacket. I wish tohave a quiet 
word with you, Bradstreet.Certainly, Mr. Holmes.
 Step into my room here.It was a small, office-l
ike room, with a huge ledger upon the table,and 
a telephone projecting from the wall. The inspec
tor sat down at hisdesk.What can I do for you, M
r. HolmesI called about that beggarman, Boone-th
e one who was charged withbeing concerned in the
 disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.
Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further 
inquiries.So I heard. You have him hereIn the ce
lls.Is he quietOh, he gives no trouble. But he i
s a dirty scoundrel.DirtyYes, it is all we can d
o to make him wash his hands, and his face isas 
black as a tinkers. Well, when once his case has
 been settled, hewill have a regular prison bath
; and I think, if you saw him, you wouldagree wi
th me that he needed it.I should like to see him
 very much.Would you That is easily done. Come t
his way. You can leave yourbag.No, I think that 
Ill take it.Very good. Come this way, if you ple
ase. He led us down a passage,opened a barred do
or, passed down a winding stair, and brought us 
to awhitewashed corridor with a line of doors on
 each side.The third on the right is his, said t
he inspector. Here it is Hequietly shot back a p
anel in the upper part of the door and glancedth
rough.He is asleep, said he. You can see him ver
y well.We both put our eyes to the grating. The 
prisoner lay with his facetowards us, in a very 
deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He was
a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his 
calling, with acoloured shirt protruding through
 the rent in his tattered coat. Hewas, as the in
spector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime
 whichcovered his face could not conceal its rep
ulsive ugliness. A broadwheal from an old scar r
an right across it from eye to chin, and by itsc
ontraction had turned up one side of the upper l
ip, so that threeteeth were exposed in a perpetu
al snarl. A shock of very bright redhair grew lo
w over his eyes and forehead.Hes a beauty, isnt 
he said the inspector.He certainly needs a wash,
 remarked Holmes. I had an idea that hemight, an
d I took the liberty of bringing the tools with 
me. He openedthe Gladstone bag as he spoke, and 
took out, to my astonishment, a verylarge bath-s
ponge.He he You are a funny one, chuckled the in
spector.Now, if you will have the great goodness
 to open that door veryquietly, we will soon mak
e him cut a much more respectable figure.Well, I
 dont know why not, said the inspector. He doesn
t look acredit to the Bow Street cells, does he 
He slipped his key into thelock, and we all very
 quietly entered the cell. The sleeper halfturne
d, and then settled down once more into a deep s
lumber. Holmesstooped to the water-jug, moistene
d his sponge, and then rubbed ittwice vigorously
 across and down the prisoners face.Let me intro
duce you, he shouted, to Mr. Neville St. Clair, 
of Lee,in the county of Kent.Never in my life ha
ve I seen such a sight. The mans face peeled off
under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone
 was the coarse browntint Gone, too, was the hor
rid scar which had seamed it across, andthe twis
ted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to t
he face Atwitch brought away the tangled red hai
r, and there, sitting up in hisbed, was a pale, 
sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and
smooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring abo
ut him with sleepybewilderment. Then suddenly re
alising the exposure, he broke into ascream and 
threw himself down with his face to the pillow.G
reat heavens cried the inspector, it is, indeed,
 the missing man.I know him from the photograph.
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a m
an who abandons himselfto his destiny. Be it so,
 said he. And pray what am I charged withWith ma
king away with Mr. Neville St.- Oh, come, you ca
nt be chargedwith that unless they make a case o
f attempted suicide of it, said theinspector wit
h a grin. Well, I have been twenty-seven years i
n theforce, but this really takes the cake.If I 
am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious tha
t no crime hasbeen committed, and that, therefor
e, I am illegally detained.No crime, but a very 
great error has been committed, said Holmes.You 
would have done better to have trusted your wife
.It was not the wife; it was the children, groan
ed the prisoner. Godhelp me, I would not have th
em ashamed of their father. My God What anexposu
re What can I doSherlock Holmes sat down beside 
him on the couch and patted him kindlyon the sho
ulder.If you leave it to a court of law to clear
 the matter up, said he,of course you can hardly
 avoid publicity. On the other hand, if youconvi
nce the police authorities that there is no poss
ible case againstyou, I do not know that there i
s any reason that the details shouldfind their w
ay into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, 
I am sure,make notes upon anything which you mig
ht tell us and submit it to theproper authoritie
s. The case would then never go into court at al
l.God bless you cried the prisoner passionately.
 I would have enduredimprisonment, ay, even exec
ution, rather than have left my miserablesecret 
as a family blot to my children.You are the firs
t who have ever heard my story. My father was as
choolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an
 excellent education.I travelled in my youth, to
ok to the stage, and finally became areporter on
 an evening paper in London. One day my editor w
ished tohave a series of articles upon begging i
n the metropolis, and Ivolunteered to supply the
m. There was the point from which all myadventur
es started. It was only by trying begging as an 
amateur that Icould get the facts upon which to 
base my articles. When an actor Ihad, of course,
 learned all the secrets of making up, and had b
eenfamous in the green-room for my skill. I took
 advantage now of myattainments. I painted my fa
ce, and to make myself as pitiable aspossible I 
made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in
 a twist bythe aid of a small slip of flesh-colo
ured plaster. Then with a red headof hair, and a
n appropriate dress, I took my station in the bu
sinesspart of the city, ostensibly as a match-se
ller but really as a beggar.For seven hours I pl
ied my trade, and when I returned home in theeve
ning I found to my surprise that I had received 
no less than 26s.4d.I wrote my articles and thou
ght little more of the matter until, sometime la
ter, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ
 served upon mefor  25. I was at my wits end whe
re to get the money, but a suddenidea came to me
. I begged a fortnights grace from the creditor,
 askedfor a holiday from my employers, and spent
 the time in begging in theCity under my disguis
e. In ten days I had the money and had paid thed
ebt.Well, you can imagine how hard it was to set
tle down to arduous workat  2 a week when I knew
 that I could earn as much in a day bysmearing m
y face with a little paint, laying my cap on the
 ground, andsitting still. It was a long fight b
etween my pride and the money, butthe dollars wo
n at last, and I threw up reporting and sat day 
after dayin the corner which I had first chosen,
 inspiring pity by my ghastlyface and filling my
 pockets with coppers. Only one man knew my secr
et.He was the keeper of a low den in which I use
d to lodge in SwandamLane, where I could every m
orning emerge as a squalid beggar and in theeven
ings transform myself into a well-dressed man ab
out town. Thisfellow, a Lascar, was well paid by
 me for his rooms, so that I knewthat my secret 
was safe in his possession.Well, very soon I fou
nd that I was saving considerable sums of money.
I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of 
London could earn  700a year-which is less than 
my average takings-but I had exceptionaladvantag
es in my power of making up, and also in a facil
ity ofrepartee, which improved by practice and m
ade me quite a recognisedcharacter in the City. 
All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver,po
ured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in wh
ich I failed to take 2.As I grew richer I grew m
ore ambitious, took a house in the country,and e
ventually married, without anyone having a suspi
cion as to my realoccupation. My dear wife knew 
that I had business in the City. Shelittle knew 
what.Last Monday I had finished for the day and 
was dressing in my roomabove the opium den when 
I looked out of my window and saw, to myhorror a
nd astonishment, that my wife was standing in th
e street, withher eyes fixed full upon me. I gav
e a cry of surprise, threw up my armsto cover my
 face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar,
 entreatedhim to prevent anyone from coming up t
o me. I heard her voicedownstairs, but I knew th
at she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw offmy c
lothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on 
my pigments andwig. Even a wifes eyes could not 
pierce so complete a disguise. Butthen it occurr
ed to me that there might be a search in the roo
m, andthat the clothes might betray me. I threw 
open the window, reopening bymy violence a small
 cut which I had inflicted upon myself in thebed
room that morning. Then I seized my coat, which 
was weighted by thecoppers which I had just tran
sferred to it from the leather bag inwhich I car
ried my takings. I hurled it out of the window, 
and itdisappeared into the Thames. The other clo
thes would have followed, butat that moment ther
e was a rush of constables up the stair, and a f
ewminutes after I found, rather, I confess, to m
y relief, that instead ofbeing identified as Mr.
 Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as hismurdere
r.I do not know that there is anything else for 
me to explain. I wasdetermined to preserve my di
sguise as long as possible, and hence mypreferen
ce for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would 
be terriblyanxious, I slipped off my ring and co
nfided it to the Lascar at amoment when no const
able was watching me, together with a hurriedscr
awl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.T
hat note only reached her yesterday, said Holmes
.Good God What a week she must have spentThe pol
ice have watched this Lascar, said Inspector Bra
dstreet, andI can quite understand that he might
 find it difficult to post a letterunobserved. P
robably he handed it to some sailor customer of 
his, whoforgot all about it for some days.That w
as it, said Holmes, nodding approvingly; I have 
no doubt ofit. But have you never been prosecute
d for beggingMany times; but what was a fine to 
meIt must stop here, however, said Bradstreet. I
f the police are tohush this thing up, there mus
t be no more of Hugh Boone.I have sworn it by th
e most solemn oaths which a man can take.In that
 case I think that it is probable that no furthe
r steps may betaken. But if you are found again,
 then all must come out. I am sure,Mr. Holmes, t
hat we are very much indebted to you for having 
clearedthe matter up. I wish I knew how you reac
h your results.I reached this one, said my frien
d, by sitting upon five pillows andconsuming an 
ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive
 to BakerStreet we shall just be in time for bre
akfast.VII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLEI
 had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon 
the second morningafter Christmas, with the inte
ntion of wishing him the compliments ofthe seaso
n. He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dre
ssing-gown, apipe-rack within his reach upon the
 right, and a pile of crumpledmorning papers, ev
idently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the 
couchwas a wooden chair, and on the angle of the
 back hung a very seedy anddisreputable hard-fel
t hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked inse
veral places. A lens and a forceps lying upon th
e seat of the chairsuggested that the hat had be
en suspended in this manner for thepurpose of ex
amination.You are engaged, said I; perhaps I int
errupt you.Not at all. I am glad to have a frien
d with whom I can discuss myresults. The matter 
is a perfectly trivial one-he jerked his thumb i
nthe direction of the old hat-but there are poin
ts in connection withit which are not entirely d
evoid of interest and even of instruction.I seat
ed myself in his armchair and warmed my hands be
fore hiscrackling fire, for a sharp frost had se
t in, and the windows werethick with the ice cry
stals. I suppose, I remarked, that, homely asit 
looks, this thing has some deadly story linked o
n to it-that it isthe clue which will guide you 
in the solution of some mystery and thepunishmen
t of some crime.No, no. No crime, said Sherlock 
Holmes, laughing. Only one of thosewhimsical lit
tle incidents which will happen when you have fo
ur millionhuman beings all jostling each other w
ithin the space of a few squaremiles. Amid the a
ction and reaction of so dense a swarm of humani
ty,every possible combination of events may be e
xpected to take place, andmany a little problem 
will be presented which may be striking andbizar
re without being criminal. We have already had e
xperience ofsuch.So much so, I remarked, that of
 the last six cases which I haveadded to my note
s, three have been entirely free of any legal cr
ime.Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recov
er the Irene Adler papers,to the singular case o
f Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure oft
he man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no dou
bt that this smallmatter will fall into the same
 innocent category. You know Peterson,the commis
sionaireYes.It is to him that this trophy belong
s.It is his hat.No, no, he found it. Its owner i
s unknown. I beg that you will lookupon it not a
s a battered billycock but as an intellectual pr
oblem.And, first, as to how it came here. It arr
ived upon Christmas morning,in company with a go
od fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roastin
gat this moment in front of Petersons fire. The 
facts are these aboutfour oclock on Christmas mo
rning, Peterson, who, as you know, is avery hone
st fellow, was returning from some small jollifi
cation and wasmaking his way homeward down Totte
nham Court Road. In front of him hesaw, in the g
aslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight st
agger, andcarrying a white goose slung over his 
shoulder. As he reached thecorner of Goodge Stre
et, a row broke out between this stranger and al
ittle knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked 
off the mans hat, onwhich he raised his stick to
 defend himself and, swinging it over hishead, s
mashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had 
rushed forwardto protect the stranger from his a
ssailants; but the man, shocked athaving broken 
the window, and seeing an official-looking perso
n inuniform rushing towards him, dropped his goo
se, took to his heels, andvanished amid the laby
rinth of small streets which lie at the back ofT
ottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at
 the appearance ofPeterson, so that he was left 
in possession of the field of battle, andalso of
 the spoils of victory in the shape of this batt
ered hat and amost unimpeachable Christmas goose
.Which surely he restored to their ownerMy dear 
fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 
For Mrs.Henry Baker was printed upon a small car
d which was tied to the birdsleft leg, and it is
 also true that the initials H. B. are legibleup
on the lining of this hat, but as there are some
 thousands of Bakers,and some hundreds of Henry 
Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easyto re
store lost property to any one of them.What, the
n, did Peterson doHe brought round both hat and 
goose to me on Christmas morning,knowing that ev
en the smallest problems are of interest to me. 
Thegoose we retained until this morning, when th
ere were signs that, inspite of the slight frost
, it would be well that it should be eatenwithou
t unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it o
ff, therefore, tofulfil the ultimate destiny of 
a goose, while I continue to retain thehat of th
e unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinne
r.Did he not advertiseNo.Then, what clue could y
ou have as to his identityOnly as much as we can
 deduce.From his hatPrecisely.But you are joking
. What can you gather from this old battered fel
tHere is my lens. You know my methods. What can 
you gather yourself asto the individuality of th
e man who has worn this articleI took the tatter
ed object in my hands and turned it over ratherr
uefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the
 usual round shape,hard and much the worse for w
ear. The lining had been of red silk, butwas a g
ood deal discoloured. There was no makers name; 
but, as Holmeshad remarked, the initials H. B. w
ere scrawled upon one side. It waspierced in the
 brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was mis
sing. Forthe rest, it was cracked, exceedingly d
usty, and spotted in severalplaces, although the
re seemed to have been some attempt to hide thed
iscoloured patches by smearing them with ink.I c
an see nothing, said I, handing it back to my fr
iend.On the contrary, Watson, you can see everyt
hing. You fail, however, toreason from what you 
see. You are too timid in drawing yourinferences
.Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infe
r from this hatHe picked it up and gazed at it i
n the peculiar introspective fashionwhich was ch
aracteristic of him. It is perhaps less suggesti
ve than itmight have been, he remarked, and yet 
there are a few inferenceswhich are very distinc
t, and a few others which represent at least ast
rong balance of probability. That the man was hi
ghly intellectual isof course obvious upon the f
ace of it, and also that he was fairlywell-to-do
 within the last three years, although he has no
w fallen uponevil days. He had foresight, but ha
s less now than formerly, pointingto a moral ret
rogression, which, when taken with the decline o
f hisfortunes, seems to indicate some evil influ
ence, probably drink, atwork upon him. This may 
account also for the obvious fact that his wifeh
as ceased to love him.My dear HolmesHe has, howe
ver, retained some degree of self-respect, he co
ntinued,disregarding my remonstrance. He is a ma
n who leads a sedentary life,goes out little, is
 out of training entirely, is middle-aged, hasgr
izzled hair which he has had cut within the last
 few days, and whichhe anoints with lime-cream. 
These are the more patent facts which areto be d
educed from his hat. Also, by the way, that it i
s extremelyimprobable that he has gas laid on in
 his house.You are certainly joking, Holmes.Not 
in the least. Is it possible that even now, when
 I give you theseresults, you are unable to see 
how they are attainedI have no doubt that I am v
ery stupid, but I must confess that I amunable t
o follow you. For example, how did you deduce th
at this man wasintellectualFor answer Holmes cla
pped the hat upon his head. It came right over t
heforehead and settled upon the bridge of his no
se. It is a question ofcubic capacity, said he; 
a man with so large a brain must havesomething i
n it.The decline of his fortunes, thenThis hat i
s three years old. These flat brims curled at th
e edge camein then. It is a hat of the very best
 quality. Look at the band ofribbed silk and the
 excellent lining. If this man could afford to b
uyso expensive a hat three years ago, and has ha
d no hat since, then hehas assuredly gone down i
n the world.Well, that is clear enough, certainl
y. But how about the foresight andthe moral retr
ogressionSherlock Holmes laughed. Here is the fo
resight, said he putting hisfinger upon the litt
le disc and loop of the hat-securer. They arenev
er sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it i
s a sign of acertain amount of foresight, since 
he went out of his way to take thisprecaution ag
ainst the wind. But since we see that he has bro
ken theelastic and has not troubled to replace i
t, it is obvious that he hasless foresight now t
han formerly, which is a distinct proof of aweak
ening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavou
red to conceal someof these stains upon the felt
 by daubing them with ink, which is a signthat h
e has not entirely lost his self-respect.Your re
asoning is certainly plausible.The further point
s, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is griz
zled,that it has been recently cut, and that he 
uses lime-cream, are all tobe gathered from a cl
ose examination of the lower part of the lining.
The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, 
clean cut by thescissors of the barber. They all
 appear to be adhesive, and there is adistinct o
dour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe,
 is not thegritty, grey dust of the street but t
he fluffy brown dust of the house,showing that i
t has been hung up indoors most of the time, whi
le themarks of moisture upon the inside are proo
f positive that the wearerperspired very freely,
 and could therefore, hardly be in the best oftr
aining.But his wife-you said that she had ceased
 to love him.This hat has not been brushed for w
eeks. When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week
s accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when y
ourwife allows you to go out in such a state, I 
shall fear that you alsohave been unfortunate en
ough to lose your wifes affection.But he might b
e a bachelor.Nay, he was bringing home the goose
 as a peace-offering to his wife.Remember the ca
rd upon the birds leg.You have an answer to ever
ything. But how on earth do you deduce thatthe g
as is not laid on in his houseOne tallow stain, 
or even two, might come by chance; but when I se
e noless than five, I think that there can be li
ttle doubt that theindividual must be brought in
to frequent contact with burningtallow-walks ups
tairs at night probably with his hat in one hand
 and aguttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he 
never got tallow-stains froma gas-jet. Are you s
atisfiedWell, it is very ingenious, said I, laug
hing; but since, as you saidjust now, there has 
been no crime committed, and no harm done save t
heloss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a
 waste of energy.Sherlock Holmes had opened his 
mouth to reply, when the door flew open,and Pete
rson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartm
ent withflushed cheeks and the face of a man who
 is dazed with astonishment.The goose, Mr. Holme
s The goose, sir he gasped.Eh What of it, then H
as it returned to life and flapped off throughth
e kitchen window Holmes twisted himself round up
on the sofa to geta fairer view of the mans exci
ted face.See here, sir See what my wife found in
 its crop He held out hishand and displayed upon
 the centre of the palm a brilliantlyscintillati
ng blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in siz
e, but ofsuch purity and radiance that it twinkl
ed like an electric point in thedark hollow of h
is hand.Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. B
y Jove, Peterson said he,this is treasure trove 
indeed. I suppose you know what you have gotA di
amond, sir A precious stone. It cuts into glass 
as though it wereputty.Its more than a precious 
stone. It is the precious stone.Not the Countess
 of Morcars blue carbuncle I ejaculated.Precisel
y so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing
 that I haveread the advertisement about it in T
he Times every day lately. It isabsolutely uniqu
e, and its value can only be conjectured, but th
ereward offered of  1000 is certainly not within
 a twentieth part ofthe market price.A thousand 
pounds Great Lord of mercy The commissionaire pl
umpeddown into a chair and stared from one to th
e other of us.That is the reward, and I have rea
son to know that there aresentimental considerat
ions in the background which would induce theCou
ntess to part with half her fortune if she could
 but recover thegem.It was lost, if I remember a
right, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan, Iremarked.Prec
isely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. 
John Horner, aplumber, was accused of having abs
tracted it from the ladysjewel-case. The evidenc
e against him was so strong that the case hasbee
n referred to the Assizes. I have some account o
f the matter here, Ibelieve. He rummaged amid hi
s newspapers, glancing over the dates,until at l
ast he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and re
ad thefollowing paragraphHotel Cosmopolitan Jewe
l Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought 
up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst.
, abstractedfrom the jewel-case of the Countess 
of Morcar the valuable gem known asthe blue carb
uncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel
, gave hisevidence to the effect that he had sho
wn Horner up to the dressing-roomof the Countess
 of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order 
that hemight solder the second bar of the grate,
 which was loose. He hadremained with Horner som
e little time, but had finally been calledaway. 
On returning, he found that Horner had disappear
ed, that thebureau had been forced open, and tha
t the small morocco casket inwhich, as it afterw
ards transpired, the Countess was accustomed to 
keepher jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing
-table. Ryder instantlygave the alarm, and Horne
r was arrested the same evening; but the stoneco
uld not be found either upon his person or in hi
s rooms. CatherineCusack, maid to the Countess, 
deposed to having heard Ryders cry ofdismay on d
iscovering the robbery, and to having rushed int
o the room,where she found matters as described 
by the last witness. InspectorBradstreet, B divi
sion, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, 
whostruggled frantically, and protested his inno
cence in the strongestterms. Evidence of a previ
ous conviction for robbery having been givenagai
nst the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal
 summarily with theoffence, but referred it to t
he Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs ofintens
e emotion during the proceedings, fainted away a
t the conclusionand was carried out of court.Hum
 So much for the police-court, said Holmes thoug
htfully, tossingaside the paper. The question fo
r us now to solve is the sequence ofevents leadi
ng from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the cr
op of agoose in Tottenham Court Road at the othe
r. You see, Watson, our littledeductions have su
ddenly assumed a much more important and lessinn
ocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came 
from the goose, andthe goose came from Mr. Henry
 Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat andall th
e other characteristics with which I have bored 
you. So now wemust set ourselves very seriously 
to finding this gentleman andascertaining what p
art he has played in this little mystery. To dot
his, we must try the simplest means first, and t
hese lie undoubtedlyin an advertisement in all t
he evening papers. If this fail, I shallhave rec
ourse to other methods.What will you sayGive me 
a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then Found
 at thecorner of Goodge Street, a goose and a bl
ack felt hat. Mr. Henry Bakercan have the same b
y applying at 630 this evening at 221B, BakerStr
eet. That is clear and concise.Very. But will he
 see itWell, he is sure to keep an eye on the pa
pers, since, to a poor man,the loss was a heavy 
one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance i
nbreaking the window and by the approach of Pete
rson that he thought ofnothing but flight, but s
ince then he must have bitterly regretted theimp
ulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, ag
ain, theintroduction of his name will cause him 
to see it, for everyone whoknows him will direct
 his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson, ru
ndown to the advertising agency and have this pu
t in the eveningpapers.In which, sirOh, in the G
lobe, Star, Pall Mall, St. Jamess Gazette,Evenin
g News, Standard, Echo, and any others that occu
r to you.Very well, sir. And this stoneAh, yes, 
I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, P
eterson, justbuy a goose on your way back and le
ave it here with me, for we musthave one to give
 to this gentleman in place of the one which you
rfamily is now devouring.When the commissionaire
 had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held ita
gainst the light. Its a bonny thing, said he. Ju
st see how itglints and sparkles. Of course it i
s a nucleus and focus of crime.Every good stone 
is. They are the devils pet baits. In the larger
 andolder jewels every facet may stand for a blo
ody deed. This stone is notyet twenty years old.
 It was found in the banks of the Amoy River ins
outhern China and is remarkable in having every 
characteristic of thecarbuncle, save that it is 
blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spiteof it
s youth, it has already a sinister history. Ther
e have been twomurders, a vitriol-throwing, a su
icide, and several robberies broughtabout for th
e sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallise
d charcoal.Who would think that so pretty a toy 
would be a purveyor to the gallowsand the prison
 Ill lock it up in my strong box now and drop a 
line tothe Countess to say that we have it.Do yo
u think that this man Horner is innocentI cannot
 tell.Well, then, do you imagine that this other
 one, Henry Baker, hadanything to do with the ma
tterIt is, I think, much more likely that Henry 
Baker is an absolutelyinnocent man, who had no i
dea that the bird which he was carrying wasof co
nsiderably more value than if it were made of so
lid gold. That,however, I shall determine by a v
ery simple test if we have an answerto our adver
tisement.And you can do nothing until thenNothin
g.In that case I shall continue my professional 
round. But I shall comeback in the evening at th
e hour you have mentioned, for I should liketo s
ee the solution of so tangled a business.Very gl
ad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodc
ock, I believe.By the way, in view of recent occ
urrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs.Hudson to e
xamine its crop.I had been delayed at a case, an
d it was a little after half-past sixwhen I foun
d myself in Baker Street once more. As I approac
hed thehouse I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet
 with a coat which wasbuttoned up to his chin wa
iting outside in the bright semicircle whichwas 
thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the 
door was opened,and we were shown up together to
 Holmes room.Mr. Henry Baker, I believe, said he
, rising from his armchair andgreeting his visit
or with the easy air of geniality which he could
 soreadily assume. Pray take this chair by the f
ire, Mr. Baker. It is acold night, and I observe
 that your circulation is more adapted forsummer
 than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come
 at the righttime. Is that your hat, Mr. BakerYe
s, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.He was a larg
e man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, an
d a broad,intelligent face, sloping down to a po
inted beard of grizzled brown. Atouch of red in 
nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his ext
endedhand, recalled Holmes surmise as to his hab
its. His rusty blackfrock-coat was buttoned righ
t up in front, with the collar turned up,and his
 lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without 
a sign of cuffor shirt. He spoke in a slow stacc
ato fashion, choosing his words withcare, and ga
ve the impression generally of a man of learning
 andletters who had had ill-usage at the hands o
f fortune.We have retained these things for some
 days, said Holmes, because weexpected to see an
 advertisement from you giving your address. I a
m ata loss to know now why you did not advertise
.Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. Shi
llings have not been soplentiful with me as they
 once were, he remarked. I had no doubt thatthe 
gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off 
both my hat and thebird. I did not care to spend
 more money in a hopeless attempt atrecovering t
hem.Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, 
we were compelled to eatit.To eat it Our visitor
 half rose from his chair in his excitement.Yes,
 it would have been of no use to anyone had we n
ot done so. But Ipresume that this other goose u
pon the sideboard, which is about thesame weight
 and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose e
quallywellOh, certainly, certainly, answered Mr.
 Baker with a sigh of relief.Of course, we still
 have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of you
rown bird, so if you wish-The man burst into a h
earty laugh. They might be useful to me asrelics
 of my adventure, said he, but beyond that I can
 hardly seewhat use the disjecta membra of my la
te acquaintance are going to beto me. No, sir, I
 think that, with your permission, I will confin
e myattentions to the excellent bird which I per
ceive upon the sideboard.Sherlock Holmes glanced
 sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his
shoulders.There is your hat, then, and there you
r bird, said he. By the way,would it bore you to
 tell me where you got the other one from I amso
mewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen
 a better growngoose.Certainly, sir, said Baker,
 who had risen and tucked his newly gainedproper
ty under his arm. There are a few of us who freq
uent the AlphaInn, near the Museum-we are to be 
found in the Museum itself during theday, you un
derstand. This year our good host, Windigate by 
name,instituted a goose club, by which, on consi
deration of some few penceevery week, we were ea
ch to receive a bird at Christmas. My pence were
duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am
 much indebted to you,sir, for a Scotch bonnet i
s fitted neither to my years nor my gravity.With
 a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly
 to both of us andstrode off upon his way.So muc
h for Mr. Henry Baker, said Holmes when he had c
losed the doorbehind him. It is quite certain th
at he knows nothing whatever aboutthe matter. Ar
e you hungry, WatsonNot particularly.Then I sugg
est that we turn our dinner into a supper and fo
llow upthis clue while it is still hot.By all me
ans.It was a bitter night, so we drew on our uls
ters and wrapped cravatsabout our throats. Outsi
de, the stars were shining coldly in acloudless 
sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out i
nto smokelike so many pistol shots. Our footfall
s rang out crisply and loudly aswe swung through
 the doctors quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley Str
eet,and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford St
reet. In a quarter of anhour we were in Bloomsbu
ry at the Alpha Inn, which is a smallpublic-hous
e at the corner of one of the streets which runs
 down intoHolborn. Holmes pushed open the door o
f the private bar and ordered twoglasses of beer
 from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.Yo
ur beer should be excellent if it is as good as 
your geese, saidhe.My geese The man seemed surpr
ised.Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago t
o Mr. Henry Baker, who wasa member of your goose
 club.Ah yes, I see. But you see, sir, thems not
 our geese.Indeed Whose, thenWell, I got the two
 dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden.Indeed I
 know some of them. Which was itBreckinridge is 
his name.Ah I dont know him. Well, heres your go
od health landlord, andprosperity to your house.
 Good-night.Now for Mr. Breckinridge, he continu
ed, buttoning up his coat as wecame out into the
 frosty air. Remember, Watson that though we hav
e sohomely a thing as a goose at one end of this
 chain, we have at theother a man who will certa
inly get seven years penal servitude unlesswe ca
n establish his innocence. It is possible that o
ur inquiry may butconfirm his guilt; but, in any
 case, we have a line of investigationwhich has 
been missed by the police, and which a singular 
chance hasplaced in our hands. Let us follow it 
out to the bitter end. Faces tothe south, then, 
and quick marchWe passed across Holborn, down En
dell Street, and so through a zigzagof slums to 
Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls 
bore thename of Breckinridge upon it, and the pr
oprietor a horsey-looking man,with a sharp face 
and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put 
upthe shutters.Good-evening. Its a cold night, s
aid Holmes.The salesman nodded and shot a questi
oning glance at my companion.Sold out of geese, 
I see, continued Holmes, pointing at the baresla
bs of marble.Let you have five hundred to-morrow
 morning.Thats no good.Well, there are some on t
he stall with the gas-flare.Ah, but I was recomm
ended to you.Who byThe landlord of the Alpha.Oh,
 yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.Fine birds th
ey were, too. Now where did you get them fromTo 
my surprise the question provoked a burst of ang
er from thesalesman.Now, then, mister, said he, 
with his head cocked and his arms akimbo,what ar
e you driving at Lets have it straight, now.It i
s straight enough. I should like to know who sol
d you the geesewhich you supplied to the Alpha.W
ell then, I shant tell you. So nowOh, it is a ma
tter of no importance; but I dont know why you s
houldbe so warm over such a trifle.Warm Youd be 
as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am.
 When Ipay good money for a good article there s
hould be an end of thebusiness; but its Where ar
e the geese and Who did you sell thegeese to and
 What will you take for the geese One would thin
k theywere the only geese in the world, to hear 
the fuss that is made overthem.Well, I have no c
onnection with any other people who have been ma
kinginquiries, said Holmes carelessly. If you wo
nt tell us the bet isoff, that is all. But Im al
ways ready to back my opinion on a matterof fowl
s, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate 
is countrybred.Well, then, youve lost your fiver
, for its town bred, snapped thesalesman.Its not
hing of the kind.I say it is.I dont believe it.D
you think you know more about fowls than I, who 
have handled themever since I was a nipper I tel
l you, all those birds that went to theAlpha wer
e town bred.Youll never persuade me to believe t
hat.Will you bet, thenIts merely taking your mon
ey, for I know that I am right. But Illhave a so
vereign on with you, just to teach you not to be
 obstinate.The salesman chuckled grimly. Bring m
e the books, Bill, said he.The small boy brought
 round a small thin volume and a greatgreasy-bac
ked one, laying them out together beneath the ha
nging lamp.Now then, Mr. Cocksure, said the sale
sman, I thought that I was outof geese, but befo
re I finish youll find that there is still one l
eftin my shop. You see this little bookWellThats
 the list of the folk from whom I buy. Dyou see 
Well, then,here on this page are the country fol
k, and the numbers after theirnames are where th
eir accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then Yo
usee this other page in red ink Well, that is a 
list of my townsuppliers. Now, look at that thir
d name. Just read it out to me.Mrs. Oakshott, 11
7, Brixton Road-249, read Holmes.Quite so. Now t
urn that up in the ledger.Holmes turned to the p
age indicated. Here you are, Mrs. Oakshott,117, 
Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.Now, then
, whats the last entryDecember 22nd. Twenty-four
 geese at 7s. 6d.Quite so. There you are. And un
derneathSold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 1
2s.What have you to say nowSherlock Holmes looke
d deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his
pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning 
away with the air of aman whose disgust is too d
eep for words. A few yards off he stoppedunder a
 lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless 
fashion whichwas peculiar to him.When you see a 
man with whiskers of that cut and the Pink unpro
truding out of his pocket, you can always draw h
im by a bet, saidhe. I daresay that if I had put
  100 down in front of him, that manwould not ha
ve given me such complete information as was dra
wn from himby the idea that he was doing me on a
 wager. Well, Watson, we are, Ifancy, nearing th
e end of our quest, and the only point which rem
ainsto be determined is whether we should go on 
to this Mrs. Oakshottto-night, or whether we sho
uld reserve it for to-morrow. It is clearfrom wh
at that surly fellow said that there are others 
besidesourselves who are anxious about the matte
r, and I should-His remarks were suddenly cut sh
ort by a loud hubbub which broke outfrom the sta
ll which we had just left. Turning round we saw 
a littlerat-faced fellow standing in the centre 
of the circle of yellow lightwhich was thrown by
 the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, thesales
man, framed in the door of his stall, was shakin
g his fistsfiercely at the cringing figure.Ive h
ad enough of you and your geese, he shouted. I w
ish you wereall at the devil together. If you co
me pestering me any more with yoursilly talk Ill
 set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott her
e andIll answer her, but what have you to do wit
h it Did I buy the geeseoff youNo; but one of th
em was mine all the same, whined the little man.
Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it.She told me
 to ask you.Well, you can ask the King of Proosi
a, for all I care. Ive had enoughof it. Get out 
of this He rushed fiercely forward, and the inqu
irerflitted away into the darkness.Ha this may s
ave us a visit to Brixton Road, whispered Holmes
. Comewith me, and we will see what is to be mad
e of this fellow. Stridingthrough the scattered 
knots of people who lounged round the flaringsta
lls, my companion speedily overtook the little m
an and touched himupon the shoulder. He sprang r
ound, and I could see in the gas-lightthat every
 vestige of colour had been driven from his face
.Who are you, then What do you want he asked in 
a quavering voice.You will excuse me, said Holme
s blandly, but I could not helpoverhearing the q
uestions which you put to the salesman just now.
 Ithink that I could be of assistance to you.You
 Who are you How could you know anything of the 
matterMy name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my busin
ess to know what otherpeople dont know.But you c
an know nothing of thisExcuse me, I know everyth
ing of it. You are endeavouring to trace somegee
se which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton 
Road, to a salesmannamed Breckinridge, by him in
 turn to Mr. Windigate, of the Alpha, andby him 
to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a membe
r.Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have long
ed to meet, cried thelittle fellow with outstret
ched hands and quivering fingers. I canhardly ex
plain to you how interested I am in this matter.
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was 
passing. In that casewe had better discuss it in
 a cosy room rather than in this wind-sweptmarke
t-place, said he. But pray tell me, before we go
 farther, who itis that I have the pleasure of a
ssisting.The man hesitated for an instant. My na
me is John Robinson, heanswered with a sidelong 
glance.No, no; the real name, said Holmes sweetl
y. It is always awkwarddoing business with an al
ias.A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the st
ranger. Well then, saidhe, my real name is James
 Ryder.Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel
 Cosmopolitan. Pray step intothe cab, and I shal
l soon be able to tell you everything which youw
ould wish to know.The little man stood glancing 
from one to the other of us withhalf-frightened,
 half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure wheth
er heis on the verge of a windfall or of a catas
trophe. Then he stepped intothe cab, and in half
 an hour we were back in the sitting-room at Bak
erStreet. Nothing had been said during our drive
, but the high, thinbreathing of our new compani
on, and the claspings and unclaspings ofhis hand
s, spoke of the nervous tension within him.Here 
we are said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the
 room. Thefire looks very seasonable in this wea
ther. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.Pray take the bas
ket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before
 wesettle this little matter of yours. Now, then
 You want to know whatbecame of those geeseYes, 
sir.Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was on
e bird, I imagine in whichyou were interested-wh
ite, with a black bar across the tail.Ryder quiv
ered with emotion. Oh, sir, he cried, can you te
ll mewhere it went toIt came here.HereYes, and a
 most remarkable bird it proved. I dont wonder t
hat youshould take an interest in it. It laid an
 egg after it was dead-thebonniest, brightest li
ttle blue egg that ever was seen. I have it here
in my museum.Our visitor staggered to his feet a
nd clutched the mantelpiece with hisright hand. 
Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the b
luecarbuncle, which shone out like a star, with 
a cold, brilliant,many-pointed radiance. Ryder s
tood glaring with a drawn face, uncertainwhether
 to claim or to disown it.The games up, Ryder, s
aid Holmes quietly. Hold up, man, or youllbe int
o the fire Give him an arm back into his chair, 
Watson. Hes notgot blood enough to go in for fel
ony with impunity. Give him a dash ofbrandy. So 
Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp 
it is, tobe sureFor a moment he had staggered an
d nearly fallen, but the brandy broughta tinge o
f colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring wit
h frightenedeyes at his accuser.I have almost ev
ery link in my hands, and all the proofs which I
 couldpossibly need, so there is little which yo
u need tell me. Still, thatlittle may as well be
 cleared up to make the case complete. You hadhe
ard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess o
f MorcarsIt was Catherine Cusack who told me of 
it, said he in a cracklingvoice.I see-her ladysh
ips waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of sudden
wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, 
as it has been forbetter men before you; but you
 were not very scrupulous in the meansyou used. 
It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making 
of a verypretty villain in you. You knew that th
is man Horner, the plumber, hadbeen concerned in
 some such matter before, and that suspicion wou
ldrest the more readily upon him. What did you d
o, then You made somesmall job in my ladys room-
you and your confederate Cusack-and youmanaged t
hat he should be the man sent for. Then, when he
 had left, yourifled the jewel-case, raised the 
alarm, and had this unfortunate manarrested. You
 then-Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the
 rug and clutched at mycompanions knees. For God
s sake, have mercy he shrieked. Think ofmy fathe
r Of my mother It would break their hearts. I ne
ver wentwrong before I never will again. I swear
 it. Ill swear it on a Bible.Oh, dont bring it i
nto court For Christs sake, dontGet back into yo
ur chair said Holmes sternly. It is very well to
cringe and crawl now, but you thought little eno
ugh of this poor Hornerin the dock for a crime o
f which he knew nothing.I will fly, Mr. Holmes. 
I will leave the country, sir. Then the chargeag
ainst him will break down.Hum We will talk about
 that. And now let us hear a true account ofthe 
next act. How came the stone into the goose, and
 how came the gooseinto the open market Tell us 
the truth, for there lies your only hopeof safet
y.Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips.
 I will tell you it justas it happened, sir, sai
d he. When Horner had been arrested, itseemed to
 me that it would be best for me to get away wit
h the stone atonce, for I did not know at what m
oment the police might not take itinto their hea
ds to search me and my room. There was no place 
about thehotel where it would be safe. I went ou
t, as if on some commission, andI made for my si
sters house. She had married a man named Oakshot
t, andlived in Brixton Road, where she fattened 
fowls for the market. All theway there every man
 I met seemed to me to be a policeman or adetect
ive; and, for all that it was a cold night, the 
sweat was pouringdown my face before I came to t
he Brixton Road. My sister asked me whatwas the 
matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her th
at I had beenupset by the jewel robbery at the h
otel. Then I went into the back yardand smoked a
 pipe and wondered what it would be best to do.I
 had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to 
the bad, and has justbeen serving his time in Pe
ntonville. One day he had met me, and fellinto t
alk about the ways of thieves, and how they coul
d get rid of whatthey stole. I knew that he woul
d be true to me, for I knew one or twothings abo
ut him; so I made up my mind to go right on to K
ilburn, wherehe lived, and take him into my conf
idence. He would show me how to turnthe stone in
to money. But how to get to him in safety I thou
ght of theagonies I had gone through in coming f
rom the hotel. I might at anymoment be seized an
d searched, and there would be the stone in mywa
istcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall a
t the time andlooking at the geese which were wa
ddling about round my feet, andsuddenly an idea 
came into my head which showed me how I could be
at thebest detective that ever lived.My sister h
ad told me some weeks before that I might have t
he pick ofher geese for a Christmas present, and
 I knew that she was always asgood as her word. 
I would take my goose now, and in it I would car
ry mystone to Kilburn. There was a little shed i
n the yard, and behind thisI drove one of the bi
rds-a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I
caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust th
e stone down its throatas far as my finger could
 reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt theston
e pass along its gullet and down into its crop. 
But the creatureflapped and struggled, and out c
ame my sister to know what was thematter. As I t
urned to speak to her the brute broke loose and 
flutteredoff among the others.Whatever were you 
doing with that bird, Jem says she.Well, said I,
 you said youd give me one for Christmas, and I 
wasfeeling which was the fattest.Oh, says she, w
eve set yours aside for you-Jems bird, we call i
t.Its the big white one over yonder. Theres twen
ty-six of them, whichmakes one for you, and one 
for us, and two dozen for the market.Thank you, 
Maggie, says I; but if it is all the same to you
, Idrather have that one I was handling just now
.The other is a good three pound heavier, said s
he, and we fattenedit expressly for you.Never mi
nd. Ill have the other, and Ill take it now, sai
d I.Oh, just as you like, said she, a little huf
fed. Which is it youwant, thenThat white one wit
h the barred tail, right in the middle of theflo
ck.Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.W
ell, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carr
ied the bird all theway to Kilburn. I told my pa
l what I had done, for he was a man that itwas e
asy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed unt
il he choked, andwe got a knife and opened the g
oose. My heart turned to water, forthere was no 
sign of the stone, and I knew that some terrible
 mistakehad occurred. I left the bird, rushed ba
ck to my sisters, and hurriedinto the back yard.
 There was not a bird to be seen there.Where are
 they all, Maggie I cried.Gone to the dealers, J
em.Which dealersBreckinridge, of Covent Garden.B
ut was there another with a barred tail I asked,
 the same as theone I choseYes, Jem; there were 
two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tellth
em apart.Well, then, of course I saw it all, and
 I ran off as hard as my feetwould carry me to t
his man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot at
once, and not one word would he tell me as to wh
ere they had gone. Youheard him yourselves to-ni
ght. Well, he has always answered me likethat. M
y sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I
 think that I ammyself. And now-and now I am mys
elf a branded thief, without everhaving touched 
the wealth for which I sold my character. God he
lp meGod help me He burst into convulsive sobbin
g, with his face buried inhis hands.There was a 
long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing
 and by themeasured tapping of Sherlock Holmes f
inger-tips upon the edge of thetable. Then my fr
iend rose and threw open the door.Get out said h
e.What, sir Oh, Heaven bless youNo more words. G
et outAnd no more words were needed. There was a
 rush, a clatter upon thestairs, the bang of a d
oor, and the crisp rattle of running footfallsfr
om the street.After all, Watson, said Holmes, re
aching up his hand for his claypipe, I am not re
tained by the police to supply their deficiencie
s. IfHorner were in danger it would be another t
hing; but this fellow willnot appear against him
, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I a
mcommuting a felony, but it is just possible tha
t I am saving a soul.This fellow will not go wro
ng again; he is too terribly frightened.Send him
 to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for l
ife. Besides,it is the season of forgiveness. Ch
ance has put in our way a mostsingular and whims
ical problem, and its solution is its own reward
. Ifyou will have the goodness to touch the bell
, Doctor, we will beginanother investigation, in
 which, also a bird will be the chieffeature.VII
I. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BANDOn glancing
 over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which
 I haveduring the last eight years studied the m
ethods of my friend SherlockHolmes, I find many 
tragic, some comic, a large number merely strang
e,but none commonplace; for, working as he did r
ather for the love of hisart than for the acquir
ement of wealth, he refused to associate himself
with any investigation which did not tend toward
s the unusual, and eventhe fantastic. Of all the
se varied cases, however, I cannot recall anywhi
ch presented more singular features than that wh
ich was associatedwith the well-known Surrey fam
ily of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. Theevents in
 question occurred in the early days of my assoc
iation withHolmes, when we were sharing rooms as
 bachelors in Baker Street. It ispossible that I
 might have placed them upon record before, but 
apromise of secrecy was made at the time, from w
hich I have only beenfreed during the last month
 by the untimely death of the lady to whomthe pl
edge was given. It is perhaps as well that the f
acts should nowcome to light, for I have reasons
 to know that there are widespreadrumours as to 
the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to 
make thematter even more terrible than the truth
.It was early in April in the year 83 that I wok
e one morning to findSherlock Holmes standing, f
ully dressed, by the side of my bed. He wasa lat
e riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mant
elpiece showed methat it was only a quarter-past
 seven, I blinked up at him in somesurprise, and
 perhaps just a little resentment, for I was mys
elfregular in my habits.Very sorry to knock you 
up, Watson, said he, but its the common lotthis 
morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she re
torted upon me,and I on you.What is it, then-a f
ireNo; a client. It seems that a young lady has 
arrived in a considerablestate of excitement, wh
o insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now int
he sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander a
bout the metropolis atthis hour of the morning, 
and knock sleepy people up out of their beds,I p
resume that it is something very pressing which 
they have tocommunicate. Should it prove to be a
n interesting case, you would, I amsure, wish to
 follow it from the outset. I thought, at any ra
te, that Ishould call you and give you the chanc
e.My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anythi
ng.I had no keener pleasure than in following Ho
lmes in his professionalinvestigations, and in a
dmiring the rapid deductions, as swift asintuiti
ons, and yet always founded on a logical basis w
ith which heunravelled the problems which were s
ubmitted to him. I rapidly threw onmy clothes an
d was ready in a few minutes to accompany my fri
end downto the sitting-room. A lady dressed in b
lack and heavily veiled, whohad been sitting in 
the window, rose as we entered.Good-morning, mad
am, said Holmes cheerily. My name is SherlockHol
mes. This is my intimate friend and associate, D
r. Watson, beforewhom you can speak as freely as
 before myself. Ha I am glad to seethat Mrs. Hud
son has had the good sense to light the fire. Pr
ay draw upto it, and I shall order you a cup of 
hot coffee, for I observe thatyou are shivering.
It is not cold which makes me shiver, said the w
oman in a low voice,changing her seat as request
ed.What, thenIt is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terro
r. She raised her veil as shespoke, and we could
 see that she was indeed in a pitiable state ofa
gitation, her face all drawn and grey, with rest
less frightened eyes,like those of some hunted a
nimal. Her features and figure were those ofa wo
man of thirty, but her hair was shot with premat
ure grey, and herexpression was weary and haggar
d. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with oneof his q
uick, all-comprehensive glances.You must not fea
r, said he soothingly, bending forward and patti
ngher forearm. We shall soon set matters right, 
I have no doubt. Youhave come in by train this m
orning, I see.You know me, thenNo, but I observe
 the second half of a return ticket in the palm 
ofyour left glove. You must have started early, 
and yet you had a gooddrive in a dog-cart, along
 heavy roads, before you reached thestation.The 
lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilder
ment at mycompanion.There is no mystery, my dear
 madam, said he, smiling. The left armof your ja
cket is spattered with mud in no less than seven
 places. Themarks are perfectly fresh. There is 
no vehicle save a dog-cart whichthrows up mud in
 that way, and then only when you sit on the lef
t-handside of the driver.Whatever your reasons m
ay be, you are perfectly correct, said she. Ista
rted from home before six, reached Leatherhead a
t twenty past, andcame in by the first train to 
Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this strain nolonger;
 I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one t
o turn to-none,save only one, who cares for me, 
and he, poor fellow, can be of littleaid. I have
 heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you f
rom Mrs.Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour o
f her sore need. It was fromher that I had your 
address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you coul
dhelp me, too, and at least throw a little light
 through the densedarkness which surrounds me At
 present it is out of my power to rewardyou for 
your services, but in a month or six weeks I sha
ll be married,with the control of my own income,
 and then at least you shall not findme ungratef
ul.Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, 
drew out a smallcase-book, which he consulted.Fa
rintosh, said he. Ah yes, I recall the case; it 
was concerned withan opal tiara. I think it was 
before your time, Watson. I can only say,madam, 
that I shall be happy to devote the same care to
 your case as Idid to that of your friend. As to
 reward, my profession is its ownreward; but you
 are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I ma
y be putto, at the time which suits you best. An
d now I beg that you will laybefore us everythin
g that may help us in forming an opinion upon th
ematter.Alas replied our visitor, the very horro
r of my situation lies inthe fact that my fears 
are so vague, and my suspicions depend soentirel
y upon small points, which might seem trivial to
 another, thateven he to whom of all others I ha
ve a right to look for help andadvice looks upon
 all that I tell him about it as the fancies of 
anervous woman. He does not say so, but I can re
ad it from his soothinganswers and averted eyes.
 But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you cansee d
eeply into the manifold wickedness of the human 
heart. You mayadvise me how to walk amid the dan
gers which encompass me.I am all attention, mada
m.My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with 
my stepfather, who isthe last survivor of one of
 the oldest Saxon families in England, theRoylot
ts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surr
ey.Holmes nodded his head. The name is familiar 
to me, said he.The family was at one time among 
the richest in England, and theestates extended 
over the borders into Berkshire in the north, an
dHampshire in the west. In the last century, how
ever, four successiveheirs were of a dissolute a
nd wasteful disposition, and the family ruinwas 
eventually completed by a gambler in the days of
 the Regency.Nothing was left save a few acres o
f ground, and thetwo-hundred-year-old house, whi
ch is itself crushed under a heavymortgage. The 
last squire dragged out his existence there, liv
ing thehorrible life of an aristocratic pauper; 
but his only son, mystepfather, seeing that he m
ust adapt himself to the new conditions,obtained
 an advance from a relative, which enabled him t
o take amedical degree and went out to Calcutta,
 where, by his professionalskill and his force o
f character, he established a large practice. In
 afit of anger, however, caused by some robberie
s which had beenperpetrated in the house, he bea
t his native butler to death andnarrowly escaped
 a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a lo
ng termof imprisonment and afterwards returned t
o England a morose anddisappointed man.When Dr. 
Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. 
Stoner, theyoung widow of Major-General Stoner, 
of the Bengal Artillery. My sisterJulia and I we
re twins, and we were only two years old at the 
time ofmy mothers re-marriage. She had a conside
rable sum of money-not lessthan  1000 a year-and
 this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirelywhil
e we resided with him, with a provision that a c
ertain annual sumshould be allowed to each of us
 in the event of our marriage. Shortlyafter our 
return to England my mother died-she was killed 
eight yearsago in a railway accident near Crewe.
 Dr. Roylott then abandoned hisattempts to estab
lish himself in practice in London and took us t
o livewith him in the old ancestral house at Sto
ke Moran. The money which mymother had left was 
enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be
 noobstacle to our happiness.But a terrible chan
ge came over our stepfather about this time.Inst
ead of making friends and exchanging visits with
 our neighbours,who had at first been overjoyed 
to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back inthe old f
amily seat, he shut himself up in his house and 
seldom cameout save to indulge in ferocious quar
rels with whoever might cross hispath. Violence 
of temper approaching to mania has been heredita
ry inthe men of the family, and in my stepfather
s case it had, I believe,been intensified by his
 long residence in the tropics. A series ofdisgr
aceful brawls took place, two of which ended in 
the police-court,until at last he became the ter
ror of the village, and the folks wouldfly at hi
s approach, for he is a man of immense strength,
 andabsolutely uncontrollable in his anger.Last 
week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parap
et into a stream,and it was only by paying over 
all the money which I could gathertogether that 
I was able to avert another public exposure. He 
had nofriends at all save the wandering gipsies,
 and he would give thesevagabonds leave to encam
p upon the few acres of bramble-covered landwhic
h represent the family estate, and would accept 
in return thehospitality of their tents, wanderi
ng away with them sometimes forweeks on end. He 
has a passion also for Indian animals, which are
 sentover to him by a correspondent, and he has 
at this moment a cheetah anda baboon, which wand
er freely over his grounds and are feared by the
villagers almost as much as their master.You can
 imagine from what I say that my poor sister Jul
ia and I had nogreat pleasure in our lives. No s
ervant would stay with us, and for along time we
 did all the work of the house. She was but thir
ty at thetime of her death, and yet her hair had
 already begun to whiten, evenas mine has.Your s
ister is dead, thenShe died just two years ago, 
and it is of her death that I wish tospeak to yo
u. You can understand that, living the life whic
h I havedescribed, we were little likely to see 
anyone of our own age andposition. We had, howev
er, an aunt, my mothers maiden sister, MissHonor
ia Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were
 occasionallyallowed to pay short visits at this
 ladys house. Julia went there atChristmas two y
ears ago, and met there a half-pay major of mari
nes, towhom she became engaged. My stepfather le
arned of the engagement whenmy sister returned a
nd offered no objection to the marriage; but wit
hina fortnight of the day which had been fixed f
or the wedding, theterrible event occurred which
 has deprived me of my only companion.Sherlock H
olmes had been leaning back in his chair with hi
s eyes closedand his head sunk in a cushion, but
 he half opened his lids now andglanced across a
t his visitor.Pray be precise as to details, sai
d he.It is easy for me to be so, for every event
 of that dreadful time isseared into my memory. 
The manor-house is, as I have already said, very
old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bed
rooms in this wing areon the ground floor, the s
itting-rooms being in the central block ofthe bu
ildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Royl
otts, the secondmy sisters, and the third my own
. There is no communication betweenthem, but the
y all open out into the same corridor. Do I make
 myselfplainPerfectly so.The windows of the thre
e rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatalnight 
Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though w
e knew that hehad not retired to rest, for my si
ster was troubled by the smell of thestrong Indi
an cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She 
left herroom, therefore, and came into mine, whe
re she sat for some time,chatting about her appr
oaching wedding. At eleven oclock she rose tolea
ve me, but she paused at the door and looked bac
k.Tell me, Helen, said she, have you ever heard 
anyone whistle in thedead of the nightNever, sai
d I.I suppose that you could not possibly whistl
e, yourself, in yoursleepCertainly not. But whyB
ecause during the last few nights I have always,
 about three in themorning, heard a low, clear w
histle. I am a light sleeper, and it hasawakened
 me. I cannot tell where it came from-perhaps fr
om the nextroom, perhaps from the lawn. I though
t that I would just ask youwhether you had heard
 it.No, I have not. It must be those wretched gi
psies in the plantation.Very likely. And yet if 
it were on the lawn, I wonder that you didnot he
ar it also.Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you
.Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rat
e. She smiled back atme, closed my door, and a f
ew moments later I heard her key turn in thelock
.Indeed, said Holmes. Was it your custom always 
to lock yourselves inat nightAlways.And whyI thi
nk that I mentioned to you that the Doctor kept 
a cheetah and ababoon. We had no feeling of secu
rity unless our doors were locked.Quite so. Pray
 proceed with your statement.I could not sleep t
hat night. A vague feeling of impending misfortu
neimpressed me. My sister and I, you will recoll
ect, were twins, and youknow how subtle are the 
links which bind two souls which are so closelya
llied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling
 outside, and the rainwas beating and splashing 
against the windows. Suddenly, amid all thehubbu
b of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream
 of a terrifiedwoman. I knew that it was my sist
ers voice. I sprang from my bed,wrapped a shawl 
round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I ope
ned mydoor I seemed to hear a low whistle, such 
as my sister described, and afew moments later a
 clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had falle
n.As I ran down the passage, my sisters door was
 unlocked, and revolvedslowly upon its hinges. I
 stared at it horror-stricken, not knowingwhat w
as about to issue from it. By the light of the c
orridor-lamp Isaw my sister appear at the openin
g, her face blanched with terror, herhands gropi
ng for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro
 like thatof a drunkard. I ran to her and threw 
my arms round her, but at thatmoment her knees s
eemed to give way and she fell to the ground. Sh
ewrithed as one who is in terrible pain, and her
 limbs were dreadfullyconvulsed. At first I thou
ght that she had not recognised me, but as Ibent
 over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice w
hich I shall neverforget, Oh, my God Helen It wa
s the band The speckled band Therewas something 
else which she would fain have said, and she sta
bbed withher finger into the air in the directio
n of the Doctors room, but afresh convulsion sei
zed her and choked her words. I rushed out, call
ingloudly for my stepfather, and I met him haste
ning from his room in hisdressing-gown. When he 
reached my sisters side she was unconscious,and 
though he poured brandy down her throat and sent
 for medical aidfrom the village, all efforts we
re in vain, for she slowly sank anddied without 
having recovered her consciousness. Such was the
 dreadfulend of my beloved sister.One moment, sa
id Holmes, are you sure about this whistle andme
tallic sound Could you swear to itThat was what 
the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It i
s mystrong impression that I heard it, and yet, 
among the crash of the galeand the creaking of a
n old house, I may possibly have been deceived.W
as your sister dressedNo, she was in her night-d
ress. In her right hand was found thecharred stu
mp of a match, and in her left a match-box.Showi
ng that she had struck a light and looked about 
her when thealarm took place. That is important.
 And what conclusions did thecoroner come toHe i
nvestigated the case with great care, for Dr. Ro
ylotts conducthad long been notorious in the cou
nty, but he was unable to find anysatisfactory c
ause of death. My evidence showed that the door 
had beenfastened upon the inner side, and the wi
ndows were blocked byold-fashioned shutters with
 broad iron bars, which were secured everynight.
 The walls were carefully sounded, and were show
n to be quitesolid all round, and the flooring w
as also thoroughly examined, withthe same result
. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four 
largestaples. It is certain, therefore, that my 
sister was quite alone whenshe met her end. Besi
des, there were no marks of any violence uponher
.How about poisonThe doctors examined her for it
, but without success.What do you think that thi
s unfortunate lady died of, thenIt is my belief 
that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, th
oughwhat it was that frightened her I cannot ima
gine.Were there gipsies in the plantation at the
 timeYes, there are nearly always some there.Ah,
 and what did you gather from this allusion to a
 band-a speckledbandSometimes I have thought tha
t it was merely the wild talk of delirium,someti
mes that it may have referred to some band of pe
ople, perhaps tothese very gipsies in the planta
tion. I do not know whether the spottedhandkerch
iefs which so many of them wear over their heads
 might havesuggested the strange adjective which
 she used.Holmes shook his head like a man who i
s far from being satisfied.These are very deep w
aters, said he; pray go on with yournarrative.Tw
o years have passed since then, and my life has 
been until latelylonelier than ever. A month ago
, however, a dear friend, whom I haveknown for m
any years, has done me the honour to ask my hand
 inmarriage. His name is Armitage-Percy Armitage
-the second son of Mr.Armitage, of Crane Water, 
near Reading. My stepfather has offered noopposi
tion to the match, and we are to be married in t
he course of thespring. Two days ago some repair
s were started in the west wing of thebuilding, 
and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I 
have had tomove into the chamber in which my sis
ter died, and to sleep in the verybed in which s
he slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror whe
n lastnight, as I lay awake, thinking over her t
errible fate, I suddenlyheard in the silence of 
the night the low whistle which had been thehera
ld of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lam
p, but nothing wasto be seen in the room. I was 
too shaken to go to bed again, however,so I dres
sed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped do
wn, got adog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opp
osite, and drove to Leatherhead,from whence I ha
ve come on this morning with the one object of s
eeingyou and asking your advice.You have done wi
sely, said my friend. But have you told me allYe
s, all.Miss Roylott, you have not. You are scree
ning your stepfather.Why, what do you meanFor an
swer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace 
which fringed thehand that lay upon our visitors
 knee. Five little livid spots, themarks of four
 fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the whit
e wrist.You have been cruelly used, said Holmes.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her in
jured wrist. He is ahard man, she said, and perh
aps he hardly knows his own strength.There was a
 long silence, during which Holmes leaned his ch
in upon hishands and stared into the crackling f
ire.This is a very deep business, he said at las
t. There are a thousanddetails which I should de
sire to know before I decide upon our courseof a
ction. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we w
ere to come toStoke Moran to-day, would it be po
ssible for us to see over these roomswithout the
 knowledge of your stepfatherAs it happens, he s
poke of coming into town to-day upon some mostim
portant business. It is probable that he will be
 away all day, andthat there would be nothing to
 disturb you. We have a housekeeper now,but she 
is old and foolish, and I could easily get her o
ut of the way.Excellent. You are not averse to t
his trip, WatsonBy no means.Then we shall both c
ome. What are you going to do yourselfI have one
 or two things which I would wish to do now that
 I am intown. But I shall return by the twelve o
clock train, so as to be therein time for your c
oming.And you may expect us early in the afterno
on. I have myself some smallbusiness matters to 
attend to. Will you not wait and breakfastNo, I 
must go. My heart is lightened already since I h
ave confided mytrouble to you. I shall look forw
ard to seeing you again thisafternoon. She dropp
ed her thick black veil over her face and glided
from the room.And what do you think of it all, W
atson asked Sherlock Holmes,leaning back in his 
chair.It seems to me to be a most dark and sinis
ter business.Dark enough and sinister enough.Yet
 if the lady is correct in saying that the floor
ing and walls aresound, and that the door, windo
w, and chimney are impassable, then hersister mu
st have been undoubtedly alone when she met her 
mysteriousend.What becomes, then, of these noctu
rnal whistles, and what of the verypeculiar word
s of the dying womanI cannot think.When you comb
ine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence
 of aband of gipsies who are on intimate terms w
ith this old doctor, thefact that we have every 
reason to believe that the doctor has aninterest
 in preventing his stepdaughters marriage, the d
ying allusionto a band, and, finally, the fact t
hat Miss Helen Stoner heard ametallic clang, whi
ch might have been caused by one of those metal 
barsthat secured the shutters falling back into 
its place, I think thatthere is good ground to t
hink that the mystery may be cleared alongthose 
lines.But what, then, did the gipsies doI cannot
 imagine.I see many objections to any such theor
y.And so do I. It is precisely for that reason t
hat we are going toStoke Moran this day. I want 
to see whether the objections are fatal,or if th
ey may be explained away. But what in the name o
f the devilThe ejaculation had been drawn from m
y companion by the fact that ourdoor had been su
ddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had fram
edhimself in the aperture. His costume was a pec
uliar mixture of theprofessional and of the agri
cultural, having a black top-hat, a longfrock-co
at, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-c
rop swinging inhis hand. So tall was he that his
 hat actually brushed the cross bar ofthe doorwa
y, and his breadth seemed to span it across from
 side toside. A large face, seared with a thousa
nd wrinkles, burned yellow withthe sun, and mark
ed with every evil passion, was turned from one 
to theother of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot
 eyes, and his high, thin,fleshless nose, gave h
im somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old bird
of prey.Which of you is Holmes asked this appari
tion.My name, sir; but you have the advantage of
 me, said my companionquietly.I am Dr. Grimesby 
Roylott, of Stoke Moran.Indeed, Doctor, said Hol
mes blandly. Pray take a seat.I will do nothing 
of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I ha
vetraced her. What has she been saying to youIt 
is a little cold for the time of the year, said 
Holmes.What has she been saying to you screamed 
the old man furiously.But I have heard that the 
crocuses promise well, continued mycompanion imp
erturbably.Ha You put me off, do you said our ne
w visitor, taking a stepforward and shaking his 
hunting-crop. I know you, you scoundrel Ihave he
ard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler.M
y friend smiled.Holmes, the busybodyHis smile br
oadened.Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office
Holmes chuckled heartily. Your conversation is m
ost entertaining,said he. When you go out close 
the door, for there is a decideddraught.I will g
o when I have had my say. Dont you dare to meddl
e with myaffairs. I know that Miss Stoner has be
en here. I traced her I am adangerous man to fal
l foul of See here. He stepped swiftly forward,s
eized the poker, and bent it into a curve with h
is huge brown hands.See that you keep yourself o
ut of my grip, he snarled, and hurlingthe twiste
d poker into the fireplace he strode out of the 
room.He seems a very amiable person, said Holmes
, laughing. I am notquite so bulky, but if he ha
d remained I might have shown him that mygrip wa
s not much more feeble than his own. As he spoke
 he picked upthe steel poker and, with a sudden 
effort, straightened it out again.Fancy his havi
ng the insolence to confound me with the officia
ldetective force This incident gives zest to our
 investigation,however, and I only trust that ou
r little friend will not suffer fromher impruden
ce in allowing this brute to trace her. And now,
 Watson, weshall order breakfast, and afterwards
 I shall walk down to DoctorsCommons, where I ho
pe to get some data which may help us in thismat
ter.It was nearly one oclock when Sherlock Holme
s returned from hisexcursion. He held in his han
d a sheet of blue paper, scrawled overwith notes
 and figures.I have seen the will of the decease
d wife, said he. To determine itsexact meaning I
 have been obliged to work out the present price
s of theinvestments with which it is concerned. 
The total income, which at thetime of the wifes 
death was little short of  1,100, is now, throug
hthe fall in agricultural prices, not more than 
 750. Each daughter canclaim an income of  250, 
in case of marriage. It is evident,therefore, th
at if both girls had married, this beauty would 
have had amere pittance, while even one of them 
would cripple him to a veryserious extent. My mo
rnings work has not been wasted, since it haspro
ved that he has the very strongest motives for s
tanding in the wayof anything of the sort. And n
ow, Watson, this is too serious fordawdling, esp
ecially as the old man is aware that we are inte
restingourselves in his affairs; so if you are r
eady, we shall call a cab anddrive to Waterloo. 
I should be very much obliged if you would slip 
yourrevolver into your pocket. An Eleys No. 2 is
 an excellent argumentwith gentlemen who can twi
st steel pokers into knots. That and atooth-brus
h are, I think, all that we need.At Waterloo we 
were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhe
ad,where we hired a trap at the station inn and 
drove for four or fivemiles through the lovely S
urrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with abright 
sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The 
trees andwayside hedges were just throwing out t
heir first green shoots, and theair was full of 
the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me at 
leastthere was a strange contrast between the sw
eet promise of the springand this sinister quest
 upon which we were engaged. My companion sat in
the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat 
pulled down over hiseyes, and his chin sunk upon
 his breast, buried in the deepest thought.Sudde
nly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoul
der, and pointedover the meadows.Look there said
 he.A heavily timbered park stretched up in a ge
ntle slope, thickening intoa grove at the highes
t point. From amid the branches there jutted out
the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old
 mansion.Stoke Moran said he.Yes, sir, that be t
he house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, remarked thedr
iver.There is some building going on there, said
 Holmes; that is where weare going.Theres the vi
llage, said the driver, pointing to a cluster of
 roofssome distance to the left; but if you want
 to get to the house, youllfind it shorter to ge
t over this stile, and so by the footpath over t
hefields. There it is, where the lady is walking
.And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner, observed
 Holmes, shading hiseyes. Yes, I think we had be
tter do as you suggest.We got off, paid our fare
, and the trap rattled back on its way toLeather
head.I thought it as well, said Holmes as we cli
mbed the stile, that thisfellow should think we 
had come here as architects, or on some definite
business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon
, Miss Stoner. You seethat we have been as good 
as our word.Our client of the morning had hurrie
d forward to meet us with a facewhich spoke her 
joy. I have been waiting so eagerly for you, she
cried, shaking hands with us warmly. All has tur
ned out splendidly.Dr. Roylott has gone to town,
 and it is unlikely that he will be backbefore e
vening.We have had the pleasure of making the Do
ctors acquaintance, saidHolmes, and in a few wor
ds he sketched out what had occurred. MissStoner
 turned white to the lips as she listened.Good h
eavens she cried, he has followed me, then.So it
 appears.He is so cunning that I never know when
 I am safe from him. What willhe say when he ret
urnsHe must guard himself, for he may find that 
there is someone morecunning than himself upon h
is track. You must lock yourself up from himto-n
ight. If he is violent, we shall take you away t
o your aunts atHarrow. Now, we must make the bes
t use of our time, so kindly take usat once to t
he rooms which we are to examine.The building wa
s of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high ce
ntralportion and two curving wings, like the cla
ws of a crab, thrown out oneach side. In one of 
these wings the windows were broken and blockedw
ith wooden boards, while the roof was partly cav
ed in, a picture ofruin. The central portion was
 in little better repair, but theright-hand bloc
k was comparatively modern, and the blinds in th
ewindows, with the blue smoke curling up from th
e chimneys, showed thatthis was where the family
 resided. Some scaffolding had been erectedagain
st the end wall, and the stone-work had been bro
ken into, butthere were no signs of any workmen 
at the moment of our visit. Holmeswalked slowly 
up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined wi
th deepattention the outsides of the windows.Thi
s, I take it, belongs to the room in which you u
sed to sleep, thecentre one to your sisters, and
 the one next to the main building toDr. Roylott
s chamberExactly so. But I am now sleeping in th
e middle one.Pending the alterations, as I under
stand. By the way, there does notseem to be any 
very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.
There were none. I believe that it was an excuse
 to move me from myroom.Ah that is suggestive. N
ow, on the other side of this narrow wingruns th
e corridor from which these three rooms open. Th
ere are windowsin it, of courseYes, but very sma
ll ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through.A
s you both locked your doors at night, your room
s were unapproachablefrom that side. Now, would 
you have the kindness to go into your roomand ba
r your shuttersMiss Stoner did so, and Holmes, a
fter a careful examination through theopen windo
w, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter
 open, butwithout success. There was no slit thr
ough which a knife could bepassed to raise the b
ar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but
they were of solid iron, built firmly into the m
assive masonry. Humsaid he, scratching his chin 
in some perplexity, my theory certainlypresents 
some difficulties. No one could pass these shutt
ers if theywere bolted. Well, we shall see if th
e inside throws any light upon thematter.A small
 side door led into the whitewashed corridor fro
m which thethree bedrooms opened. Holmes refused
 to examine the third chamber, sowe passed at on
ce to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was 
nowsleeping, and in which her sister had met wit
h her fate. It was ahomely little room, with a l
ow ceiling and a gaping fireplace, afterthe fash
ion of old country-houses. A brown chest of draw
ers stood inone corner, a narrow white-counterpa
ned bed in another, and adressing-table on the l
eft-hand side of the window. These articles,with
 two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the f
urniture in theroom save for a square of Wilton 
carpet in the centre. The boards roundand the pa
nelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten o
ak, so oldand discoloured that it may have dated
 from the original building ofthe house. Holmes 
drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat sil
ent,while his eyes travelled round and round and
 up and down, taking inevery detail of the apart
ment.Where does that bell communicate with he as
ked at last pointing to athick bell-rope which h
ung down beside the bed, the tassel actuallylyin
g upon the pillow.It goes to the housekeepers ro
om.It looks newer than the other thingsYes, it w
as only put there a couple of years ago.Your sis
ter asked for it, I supposeNo, I never heard of 
her using it. We used always to get what wewante
d for ourselves.Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to
 put so nice a bell-pull there. Youwill excuse m
e for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to
 thisfloor. He threw himself down upon his face 
with his lens in his handand crawled swiftly bac
kward and forward, examining minutely the cracks
between the boards. Then he did the same with th
e wood-work with whichthe chamber was panelled. 
Finally he walked over to the bed and spentsome 
time in staring at it and in running his eye up 
and down the wall.Finally he took the bell-rope 
in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.Why, its a d
ummy, said he.Wont it ringNo, it is not even att
ached to a wire. This is very interesting. Youca
n see now that it is fastened to a hook just abo
ve where the littleopening for the ventilator is
.How very absurd I never noticed that before.Ver
y strange muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. 
There are one ortwo very singular points about t
his room. For example, what a fool abuilder must
 be to open a ventilator into another room, when
, with thesame trouble, he might have communicat
ed with the outside airThat is also quite modern
, said the lady.Done about the same time as the 
bell-rope remarked Holmes.Yes, there were severa
l little changes carried out about that time.The
y seem to have been of a most interesting charac
ter-dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do no
t ventilate. With yourpermission, Miss Stoner, w
e shall now carry our researches into theinner a
partment.Dr. Grimesby Roylotts chamber was large
r than that of hisstep-daughter, but was as plai
nly furnished. A camp-bed, a small woodenshelf f
ull of books, mostly of a technical character, a
n armchairbeside the bed, a plain wooden chair a
gainst the wall, a round table,and a large iron 
safe were the principal things which met the eye
.Holmes walked slowly round and examined each an
d all of them with thekeenest interest.Whats in 
here he asked, tapping the safe.My stepfathers b
usiness papers.Oh you have seen inside, thenOnly
 once, some years ago. I remember that it was fu
ll of papers.There isnt a cat in it, for example
No. What a strange ideaWell, look at this He too
k up a small saucer of milk which stood onthe to
p of it.No; we dont keep a cat. But there is a c
heetah and a baboon.Ah, yes, of course Well, a c
heetah is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of mil
k does not go very far in satisfying its wants, 
I daresay.There is one point which I should wish
 to determine. He squatted downin front of the w
ooden chair and examined the seat of it with the
greatest attention.Thank you. That is quite sett
led, said he, rising and putting hislens in his 
pocket. Hullo Here is something interestingThe o
bject which had caught his eye was a small dog l
ash hung on onecorner of the bed. The lash, howe
ver, was curled upon itself and tiedso as to mak
e a loop of whipcord.What do you make of that, W
atsonIts a common enough lash. But I dont know w
hy it should be tied.That is not quite so common
, is it Ah, me its a wicked world, andwhen a cle
ver man turns his brains to crime it is the wors
t of all. Ithink that I have seen enough now, Mi
ss Stoner, and with yourpermission we shall walk
 out upon the lawn.I had never seen my friends f
ace so grim or his brow so dark as it waswhen we
 turned from the scene of this investigation. We
 had walkedseveral times up and down the lawn, n
either Miss Stoner nor myselfliking to break in 
upon his thoughts before he roused himself from 
hisreverie.It is very essential, Miss Stoner, sa
id he, that you shouldabsolutely follow my advic
e in every respect.I shall most certainly do so.
The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Yo
ur life may dependupon your compliance.I assure 
you that I am in your hands.In the first place, 
both my friend and I must spend the night in you
rroom.Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in ast
onishment.Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I 
believe that that is the villageinn over thereYe
s, that is the Crown.Very good. Your windows wou
ld be visible from thereCertainly.You must confi
ne yourself to your room, on pretence of a heada
che,when your stepfather comes back. Then when y
ou hear him retire for thenight, you must open t
he shutters of your window, undo the hasp, putyo
ur lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdr
aw quietly witheverything which you are likely t
o want into the room which you used tooccupy. I 
have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you
 could managethere for one night.Oh, yes, easily
.The rest you will leave in our hands.But what w
ill you doWe shall spend the night in your room,
 and we shall investigate thecause of this noise
 which has disturbed you.I believe, Mr. Holmes, 
that you have already made up your mind, saidMis
s Stoner, laying her hand upon my companions sle
eve.Perhaps I have.Then, for pitys sake, tell me
 what was the cause of my sistersdeath.I should 
prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak.You
 can at least tell me whether my own thought is 
correct, and if shedied from some sudden fright.
No, I do not think so. I think that there was pr
obably some moretangible cause. And now, Miss St
oner, we must leave you for if Dr.Roylott return
ed and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good
-bye, andbe brave, for if you will do what I hav
e told you, you may rest assuredthat we shall so
on drive away the dangers that threaten you.Sher
lock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging 
a bedroom andsitting-room at the Crown Inn. They
 were on the upper floor, and fromour window we 
could command a view of the avenue gate, and of 
theinhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At
 dusk we saw Dr. GrimesbyRoylott drive past, his
 huge form looming up beside the little figureof
 the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight 
difficulty in undoingthe heavy iron gates, and w
e heard the hoarse roar of the Doctorsvoice and 
saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fi
sts at him.The trap drove on, and a few minutes 
later we saw a sudden light springup among the t
rees as the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-r
ooms.Do you know, Watson, said Holmes as we sat 
together in the gatheringdarkness, I have really
 some scruples as to taking you to-night. Therei
s a distinct element of danger.Can I be of assis
tanceYour presence might be invaluable.Then I sh
all certainly come.It is very kind of you.You sp
eak of danger. You have evidently seen more in t
hese rooms thanwas visible to me.No, but I fancy
 that I may have deduced a little more. I imagin
e thatyou saw all that I did.I saw nothing remar
kable save the bell-rope, and what purpose thatc
ould answer I confess is more than I can imagine
.You saw the ventilator, tooYes, but I do not th
ink that it is such a very unusual thing to have
 asmall opening between two rooms. It was so sma
ll that a rat couldhardly pass through.I knew th
at we should find a ventilator before ever we ca
me to StokeMoran.My dear HolmesOh, yes, I did. Y
ou remember in her statement she said that her s
istercould smell Dr. Roylotts cigar. Now, of cou
rse that suggested at oncethat there must be a c
ommunication between the two rooms. It could onl
ybe a small one, or it would have been remarked 
upon at the coronersinquiry. I deduced a ventila
tor.But what harm can there be in thatWell, ther
e is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A 
ventilatoris made, a cord is hung, and a lady wh
o sleeps in the bed dies. Doesnot that strike yo
uI cannot as yet see any connection.Did you obse
rve anything very peculiar about that bedNo.It w
as clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed 
fastened like thatbeforeI cannot say that I have
.The lady could not move her bed. It must always
 be in the samerelative position to the ventilat
or and to the rope-or so we may callit, since it
 was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.Holmes,
 I cried, I seem to see dimly what you are hinti
ng at. We areonly just in time to prevent some s
ubtle and horrible crime.Subtle enough and horri
ble enough. When a doctor does go wrong he isthe
 first of criminals. He has nerve and he has kno
wledge. Palmer andPritchard were among the heads
 of their profession. This man strikeseven deepe
r, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to
 strikedeeper still. But we shall have horrors e
nough before the night isover; for goodness sake
 let us have a quiet pipe and turn our mindsfor 
a few hours to something more cheerful.About nin
e oclock the light among the trees was extinguis
hed, and allwas dark in the direction of the Man
or House. Two hours passed slowlyaway, and then,
 suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a singl
e brightlight shone out right in front of us.Tha
t is our signal, said Holmes, springing to his f
eet; it comesfrom the middle window.As we passed
 out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,
 explainingthat we were going on a late visit to
 an acquaintance, and that it waspossible that w
e might spend the night there. A moment later we
 wereout on the dark road, a chill wind blowing 
in our faces, and one yellowlight twinkling in f
ront of us through the gloom to guide us on ours
ombre errand.There was little difficulty in ente
ring the grounds, for unrepairedbreaches gaped i
n the old park wall. Making our way among the tr
ees, wereached the lawn, crossed it, and were ab
out to enter through thewindow when out from a c
lump of laurel bushes there darted what seemedto
 be a hideous and distorted child, who threw its
elf upon the grasswith writhing limbs and then r
an swiftly across the lawn into thedarkness.My G
od I whispered; did you see itHolmes was for the
 moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a
 viceupon my wrist in his agitation. Then he bro
ke into a low laugh and puthis lips to my ear.It
 is a nice household, he murmured. That is the b
aboon.I had forgotten the strange pets which the
 Doctor affected. There was acheetah, too; perha
ps we might find it upon our shoulders at anymom
ent. I confess that I felt easier in my mind whe
n, after followingHolmes example and slipping of
f my shoes, I found myself inside thebedroom. My
 companion noiselessly closed the shutters, move
d the lamponto the table, and cast his eyes roun
d the room. All was as we hadseen it in the dayt
ime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet
 ofhis hand, he whispered into my ear again so g
ently that it was all thatI could do to distingu
ish the wordsThe least sound would be fatal to o
ur plans.I nodded to show that I had heard.We mu
st sit without light. He would see it through th
e ventilator.I nodded again.Do not go asleep; yo
ur very life may depend upon it. Have your pisto
lready in case we should need it. I will sit on 
the side of the bed, andyou in that chair.I took
 out my revolver and laid it on the corner of th
e table.Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, 
and this he placed upon the bedbeside him. By it
 he laid the box of matches and the stump of a c
andle.Then he turned down the lamp, and we were 
left in darkness.How shall I ever forget that dr
eadful vigil I could not hear a sound,not even t
he drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my c
ompanion satopen-eyed, within a few feet of me, 
in the same state of nervoustension in which I w
as myself. The shutters cut off the least ray of
light, and we waited in absolute darkness.From o
utside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, 
and once at ourvery window a long drawn catlike 
whine, which told us that the cheetahwas indeed 
at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tone
s of theparish clock, which boomed out every qua
rter of an hour. How long theyseemed, those quar
ters Twelve struck, and one and two and three, a
ndstill we sat waiting silently for whatever mig
ht befall.Suddenly there was the momentary gleam
 of a light up in the directionof the ventilator
, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded 
by astrong smell of burning oil and heated metal
. Someone in the next roomhad lit a dark-lantern
. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and thenal
l was silent once more, though the smell grew st
ronger. For half anhour I sat with straining ear
s. Then suddenly another sound becameaudible-a v
ery gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small
 jet ofsteam escaping continually from a kettle.
 The instant that we heard it,Holmes sprang from
 the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously w
ithhis cane at the bell-pull.You see it, Watson 
he yelled. You see itBut I saw nothing. At the m
oment when Holmes struck the light I heard alow,
 clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing in
to my weary eyesmade it impossible for me to tel
l what it was at which my friend lashedso savage
ly. I could, however, see that his face was dead
ly pale andfilled with horror and loathing. He h
ad ceased to strike and was gazingup at the vent
ilator when suddenly there broke from the silenc
e of thenight the most horrible cry to which I h
ave ever listened. It swelledup louder and loude
r, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger allm
ingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say that
 away down in thevillage, and even in the distan
t parsonage, that cry raised thesleepers from th
eir beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I st
oodgazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the las
t echoes of it had diedaway into the silence fro
m which it rose.What can it mean I gasped.It mea
ns that it is all over, Holmes answered. And per
haps, afterall, it is for the best. Take your pi
stol, and we will enter Dr.Roylotts room.With a 
grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down 
the corridor.Twice he struck at the chamber door
 without any reply from within. Thenhe turned th
e handle and entered, I at his heels, with the c
ockedpistol in my hand.It was a singular sight w
hich met our eyes. On the table stood adark-lant
ern with the shutter half open, throwing a brill
iant beam oflight upon the iron safe, the door o
f which was ajar. Beside thistable, on the woode
n chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long
grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding b
eneath, and his feetthrust into red heelless Tur
kish slippers. Across his lap lay the shortstock
 with the long lash which we had noticed during 
the day. His chinwas cocked upward and his eyes 
were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare atthe corn
er of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a pecul
iar yellowband, with brownish speckles, which se
emed to be bound tightly roundhis head. As we en
tered he made neither sound nor motion.The band 
the speckled band whispered Holmes.I took a step
 forward. In an instant his strange headgear beg
an tomove, and there reared itself from among hi
s hair the squatdiamond-shaped head and puffed n
eck of a loathsome serpent.It is a swamp adder c
ried Holmes; the deadliest snake in India. Hehas
 died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violen
ce does, in truth,recoil upon the violent, and t
he schemer falls into the pit which hedigs for a
nother. Let us thrust this creature back into it
s den, and wecan then remove Miss Stoner to some
 place of shelter and let the countypolice know 
what has happened.As he spoke he drew the dog-wh
ip swiftly from the dead mans lap, andthrowing t
he noose round the reptiles neck he drew it from
 its horridperch and, carrying it at arms length
, threw it into the iron safe,which he closed up
on it.Such are the true facts of the death of Dr
. Grimesby Roylott, of StokeMoran. It is not nec
essary that I should prolong a narrative which h
asalready run to too great a length by telling h
ow we broke the sad newsto the terrified girl, h
ow we conveyed her by the morning train to theca
re of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow p
rocess of officialinquiry came to the conclusion
 that the doctor met his fate whileindiscreetly 
playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I
 had yetto learn of the case was told me by Sher
lock Holmes as we travelledback next day.I had, 
said he, come to an entirely erroneous conclusio
n whichshows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it a
lways is to reason frominsufficient data. The pr
esence of the gipsies, and the use of the wordba
nd, which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, t
o explain theappearance which she had caught a h
urried glimpse of by the light ofher match, were
 sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong sce
nt. Ican only claim the merit that I instantly r
econsidered my positionwhen, however, it became 
clear to me that whatever danger threatened anoc
cupant of the room could not come either from th
e window or the door.My attention was speedily d
rawn, as I have already remarked to you, tothis 
ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down
 to the bed. Thediscovery that this was a dummy,
 and that the bed was clamped to thefloor, insta
ntly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope wa
s there asa bridge for something passing through
 the hole and coming to the bed.The idea of a sn
ake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled
 itwith my knowledge that the doctor was furnish
ed with a supply ofcreatures from India, I felt 
that I was probably on the right track.The idea 
of using a form of poison which could not possib
ly bediscovered by any chemical test was just su
ch a one as would occur to aclever and ruthless 
man who had had an Eastern training. The rapidit
ywith which such a poison would take effect woul
d also, from his pointof view, be an advantage. 
It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, whocou
ld distinguish the two little dark punctures whi
ch would show wherethe poison fangs had done the
ir work. Then I thought of the whistle. Ofcourse
 he must recall the snake before the morning lig
ht revealed it tothe victim. He had trained it, 
probably by the use of the milk which wesaw, to 
return to him when summoned. He would put it thr
ough thisventilator at the hour that he thought 
best, with the certainty that itwould crawl down
 the rope and land on the bed. It might or might
 notbite the occupant, perhaps she might escape 
every night for a week, butsooner or later she m
ust fall a victim.I had come to these conclusion
s before ever I had entered his room. Aninspecti
on of his chair showed me that he had been in th
e habit ofstanding on it, which of course would 
be necessary in order that heshould reach the ve
ntilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of m
ilk,and the loop of whipcord were enough to fina
lly dispel any doubts whichmay have remained. Th
e metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner wasobvious
ly caused by her stepfather hastily closing the 
door of his safeupon its terrible occupant. Havi
ng once made up my mind, you know thesteps which
 I took in order to put the matter to the proof.
 I heard thecreature hiss as I have no doubt tha
t you did also, and I instantly litthe light and
 attacked it.With the result of driving it throu
gh the ventilator.And also with the result of ca
using it to turn upon its master at theother sid
e. Some of the blows of my cane came home and ro
used itssnakish temper, so that it flew upon the
 first person it saw. In thisway I am no doubt i
ndirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylottsd
eath, and I cannot say that it is likely to weig
h very heavily upon myconscience.IX. THE ADVENTU
RE OF THE ENGINEERS THUMBOf all the problems whi
ch have been submitted to my friend, Mr.Sherlock
 Holmes, for solution during the years of our in
timacy, therewere only two which I was the means
 of introducing to his notice-thatof Mr. Hatherl
eys thumb, and that of Colonel Warburtons madnes
s. Ofthese the latter may have afforded a finer 
field for an acute andoriginal observer, but the
 other was so strange in its inception and sodra
matic in its details that it may be the more wor
thy of being placedupon record, even if it gave 
my friend fewer openings for thosedeductive meth
ods of reasoning by which he achieved such remar
kableresults. The story has, I believe, been tol
d more than once in thenewspapers, but, like all
 such narratives, its effect is much lessstrikin
g when set forth en bloc in a single half-column
 of print thanwhen the facts slowly evolve befor
e your own eyes, and the mysteryclears gradually
 away as each new discovery furnishes a step whi
chleads on to the complete truth. At the time th
e circumstances made adeep impression upon me, a
nd the lapse of two years has hardly servedto we
aken the effect.It was in the summer of 89, not 
long after my marriage, that theevents occurred 
which I am now about to summarise. I had returne
d tocivil practice and had finally abandoned Hol
mes in his Baker Streetrooms, although I continu
ally visited him and occasionally evenpersuaded 
him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to co
me and visitus. My practice had steadily increas
ed, and as I happened to live at novery great di
stance from Paddington Station, I got a few pati
ents fromamong the officials. One of these, whom
 I had cured of a painful andlingering disease, 
was never weary of advertising my virtues and of
endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over w
hom he might have anyinfluence.One morning, at a
 little before seven oclock, I was awakened by t
hemaid tapping at the door to announce that two 
men had come fromPaddington and were waiting in 
the consulting-room. I dressedhurriedly, for I k
new by experience that railway cases were seldom
trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended
, my old ally, theguard, came out of the room an
d closed the door tightly behind him.Ive got him
 here, he whispered, jerking his thumb over his 
shoulder;hes all right.What is it, then I asked,
 for his manner suggested that it was somestrang
e creature which he had caged up in my room.Its 
a new patient, he whispered. I thought Id bring 
him roundmyself; then he couldnt slip away. Ther
e he is, all safe and sound. Imust go now, Docto
r; I have my dooties, just the same as you. And 
offhe went, this trusty tout, without even givin
g me time to thank him.I entered my consulting-r
oom and found a gentleman seated by the table.He
 was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed 
with a soft cloth capwhich he had laid down upon
 my books. Round one of his hands he had ahandke
rchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with 
bloodstains. Hewas young, not more than five-and
-twenty, I should say, with a strong,masculine f
ace; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the
 impressionof a man who was suffering from some 
strong agitation, which it tookall his strength 
of mind to control.I am sorry to knock you up so
 early, Doctor, said he, but I have hada very se
rious accident during the night. I came in by tr
ain thismorning, and on inquiring at Paddington 
as to where I might find adoctor, a worthy fello
w very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid 
acard, but I see that she has left it upon the s
ide-table.I took it up and glanced at it. Mr. Vi
ctor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer, 16A, Victoria
 Street 3rd floor. That was the name, style,and 
abode of my morning visitor. I regret that I hav
e kept youwaiting, said I, sitting down in my li
brary-chair. You are fresh froma night journey, 
I understand, which is in itself a monotonousocc
upation.Oh, my night could not be called monoton
ous, said he, and laughed. Helaughed very hearti
ly, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in h
ischair and shaking his sides. All my medical in
stincts rose up againstthat laugh.Stop it I crie
d; pull yourself together and I poured out somew
ater from a caraffe.It was useless, however. He 
was off in one of those hystericaloutbursts whic
h come upon a strong nature when some great cris
is isover and gone. Presently he came to himself
 once more, very weary andpale-looking.I have be
en making a fool of myself, he gasped.Not at all
. Drink this. I dashed some brandy into the wate
r, and thecolour began to come back to his blood
less cheeks.Thats better said he. And now, Docto
r, perhaps you would kindlyattend to my thumb, o
r rather to the place where my thumb used to be.
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his han
d. It gave even myhardened nerves a shudder to l
ook at it. There were four protrudingfingers and
 a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb sh
ould havebeen. It had been hacked or torn right 
out from the roots.Good heavens I cried, this is
 a terrible injury. It must have bledconsiderabl
y.Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I
 think that I must havebeen senseless for a long
 time. When I came to I found that it wasstill b
leeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief ve
ry tightly roundthe wrist and braced it up with 
a twig.Excellent You should have been a surgeon.
It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and cam
e within my ownprovince.This has been done, said
 I, examining the wound, by a very heavy andshar
p instrument.A thing like a cleaver, said he.An 
accident, I presumeBy no means.What a murderous 
attackVery murderous indeed.You horrify me.I spo
nged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and fina
lly covered itover with cotton wadding and carbo
lised bandages. He lay back withoutwincing, thou
gh he bit his lip from time to time.How is that 
I asked when I had finished.Capital Between your
 brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I wa
svery weak, but I have had a good deal to go thr
ough.Perhaps you had better not speak of the mat
ter. It is evidently tryingto your nerves.Oh, no
, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the p
olice; but,between ourselves, if it were not for
 the convincing evidence of thiswound of mine, I
 should be surprised if they believed my stateme
nt, forit is a very extraordinary one, and I hav
e not much in the way of proofwith which to back
 it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues 
whichI can give them are so vague that it is a q
uestion whether justice willbe done.Ha cried I, 
if it is anything in the nature of a problem whi
ch youdesire to see solved, I should strongly re
commend you to come to myfriend, Mr. Sherlock Ho
lmes, before you go to the official police.Oh, I
 have heard of that fellow, answered my visitor,
 and I shouldbe very glad if he would take the m
atter up, though of course I mustuse the officia
l police as well. Would you give me an introduct
ion tohimIll do better. Ill take you round to hi
m myself.I should be immensely obliged to you.We
ll call a cab and go together. We shall just be 
in time to have alittle breakfast with him. Do y
ou feel equal to itYes; I shall not feel easy un
til I have told my story.Then my servant will ca
ll a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant. 
I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly 
to my wife,and in five minutes was inside a hans
om, driving with my newacquaintance to Baker Str
eet.Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging
 about his sitting-room inhis dressing-gown, rea
ding the agony column of The Times and smokinghi
s before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of a
ll the plugs anddottles left from his smokes of 
the day before, all carefully dried andcollected
 on the corner of the mantelpiece. He received u
s in hisquietly genial fashion, ordered fresh ra
shers and eggs, and joined usin a hearty meal. W
hen it was concluded he settled our new acquaint
anceupon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his h
ead, and laid a glass ofbrandy and water within 
his reach.It is easy to see that your experience
 has been no common one, Mr.Hatherley, said he. 
Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutel
yat home. Tell us what you can, but stop when yo
u are tired and keep upyour strength with a litt
le stimulant.Thank you, said my patient, but I h
ave felt another man since thedoctor bandaged me
, and I think that your breakfast has completed 
thecure. I shall take up as little of your valua
ble time as possible, so Ishall start at once up
on my peculiar experiences.Holmes sat in his big
 armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded expressio
nwhich veiled his keen and eager nature, while I
 sat opposite to him,and we listened in silence 
to the strange story which our visitordetailed t
o us.You must know, said he, that I am an orphan
 and a bachelor, residingalone in lodgings in Lo
ndon. By profession I am a hydraulic engineer,an
d I have had considerable experience of my work 
during the sevenyears that I was apprenticed to 
Venner  Matheson, the well-known firm,of Greenwi
ch. Two years ago, having served my time, and ha
ving alsocome into a fair sum of money through m
y poor fathers death, Idetermined to start in bu
siness for myself and took professionalchambers 
in Victoria Street.I suppose that everyone finds
 his first independent start in businessa dreary
 experience. To me it has been exceptionally so.
 During twoyears I have had three consultations 
and one small job, and that isabsolutely all tha
t my profession has brought me. My gross takings
amount to  27 10s. Every day, from nine in the m
orning until four inthe afternoon, I waited in m
y little den, until at last my heart beganto sin
k, and I came to believe that I should never hav
e any practice atall.Yesterday, however, just as
 I was thinking of leaving the office, myclerk e
ntered to say there was a gentleman waiting who 
wished to see meupon business. He brought up a c
ard, too, with the name of ColonelLysander Stark
 engraved upon it. Close at his heels came the c
olonelhimself, a man rather over the middle size
, but of an exceedingthinness. I do not think th
at I have ever seen so thin a man. His wholeface
 sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin
 of his cheeks wasdrawn quite tense over his out
standing bones. Yet this emaciationseemed to be 
his natural habit, and due to no disease, for hi
s eye wasbright, his step brisk, and his bearing
 assured. He was plainly butneatly dressed, and 
his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty t
hanthirty.Mr. Hatherley said he, with something 
of a German accent. You havebeen recommended to 
me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is not onl
yproficient in his profession but is also discre
et and capable ofpreserving a secret.I bowed, fe
eling as flattered as any young man would at suc
h anaddress. May I ask who it was who gave me so
 good a characterWell, perhaps it is better that
 I should not tell you that just atthis moment. 
I have it from the same source that you are both
 an orphanand a bachelor and are residing alone 
in London.That is quite correct, I answered; but
 you will excuse me if I saythat I cannot see ho
w all this bears upon my professionalqualificati
ons. I understand that it was on a professional 
matter thatyou wished to speak to meUndoubtedly 
so. But you will find that all I say is really t
o thepoint. I have a professional commission for
 you, but absolute secrecyis quite essential-abs
olute secrecy, you understand, and of course wem
ay expect that more from a man who is alone than
 from one who lives inthe bosom of his family.If
 I promise to keep a secret, said I, you may abs
olutely dependupon my doing so.He looked very ha
rd at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I 
hadnever seen so suspicious and questioning an e
ye.Do you promise, then said he at last.Yes, I p
romise.Absolute and complete silence before, dur
ing, and after No referenceto the matter at all,
 either in word or writingI have already given y
ou my word.Very good. He suddenly sprang up, and
 darting like lightning acrossthe room he flung 
open the door. The passage outside was empty.Tha
ts all right, said he, coming back. I know that 
clerks aresometimes curious as to their masters 
affairs. Now we can talk insafety. He drew up hi
s chair very close to mine and began to stare at
me again with the same questioning and thoughtfu
l look.A feeling of repulsion, and of something 
akin to fear had begun torise within me at the s
trange antics of this fleshless man. Even mydrea
d of losing a client could not restrain me from 
showing myimpatience.I beg that you will state y
our business, sir, said I; my time is ofvalue. H
eaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the
 words came tomy lips.How would fifty guineas fo
r a nights work suit you he asked.Most admirably
.I say a nights work, but an hours would be near
er the mark. Isimply want your opinion about a h
ydraulic stamping machine which hasgot out of ge
ar. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon s
et itright ourselves. What do you think of such 
a commission as thatThe work appears to be light
 and the pay munificent.Precisely so. We shall w
ant you to come to-night by the last train.Where
 toTo Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place
 near the borders ofOxfordshire, and within seve
n miles of Reading. There is a train fromPadding
ton which would bring you there at about 1115.Ve
ry good.I shall come down in a carriage to meet 
you.There is a drive, thenYes, our little place 
is quite out in the country. It is a good sevenm
iles from Eyford Station.Then we can hardly get 
there before midnight. I suppose there wouldbe n
o chance of a train back. I should be compelled 
to stop the night.Yes, we could easily give you 
a shake-down.That is very awkward. Could I not c
ome at some more convenient hourWe have judged i
t best that you should come late. It is to recom
penseyou for any inconvenience that we are payin
g to you, a young andunknown man, a fee which wo
uld buy an opinion from the very heads ofyour pr
ofession. Still, of course, if you would like to
 draw out of thebusiness, there is plenty of tim
e to do so.I thought of the fifty guineas, and o
f how very useful they would beto me. Not at all
, said I, I shall be very happy to accommodatemy
self to your wishes. I should like, however, to 
understand a littlemore clearly what it is that 
you wish me to do.Quite so. It is very natural t
hat the pledge of secrecy which we haveexacted f
rom you should have aroused your curiosity. I ha
ve no wish tocommit you to anything without your
 having it all laid before you. Isuppose that we
 are absolutely safe from eavesdroppersEntirely.
Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aw
are thatfullers-earth is a valuable product, and
 that it is only found in oneor two places in En
glandI have heard so.Some little time ago I boug
ht a small place-a very small place-withinten mi
les of Reading. I was fortunate enough to discov
er that there wasa deposit of fullers-earth in o
ne of my fields. On examining it,however, I foun
d that this deposit was a comparatively small on
e, andthat it formed a link between two very muc
h larger ones upon the rightand left-both of the
m, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. The
segood people were absolutely ignorant that thei
r land contained thatwhich was quite as valuable
 as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to myinterest
 to buy their land before they discovered its tr
ue value, butunfortunately I had no capital by w
hich I could do this. I took a fewof my friends 
into the secret, however, and they suggested tha
t weshould quietly and secretly work our own lit
tle deposit and that inthis way we should earn t
he money which would enable us to buy theneighbo
uring fields. This we have now been doing for so
me time, and inorder to help us in our operation
s we erected a hydraulic press. Thispress, as I 
have already explained, has got out of order, an
d we wishyour advice upon the subject. We guard 
our secret very jealously,however, and if it onc
e became known that we had hydraulic engineersco
ming to our little house, it would soon rouse in
quiry, and then, ifthe facts came out, it would 
be good-bye to any chance of getting thesefields
 and carrying out our plans. That is why I have 
made you promiseme that you will not tell a huma
n being that you are going to Eyfordto-night. I 
hope that I make it all plainI quite follow you,
 said I. The only point which I could not quiteu
nderstand was what use you could make of a hydra
ulic press inexcavating fullers-earth, which, as
 I understand, is dug out likegravel from a pit.
Ah said he carelessly, we have our own process. 
We compress theearth into bricks, so as to remov
e them without revealing what theyare. But that 
is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into my
confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown 
you how I trust you.He rose as he spoke. I shall
 expect you, then, at Eyford at 1115.I shall cer
tainly be there.And not a word to a soul. He loo
ked at me with a last long,questioning gaze, and
 then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, h
ehurried from the room.Well, when I came to thin
k it all over in cool blood I was very muchaston
ished, as you may both think, at this sudden com
mission which hadbeen intrusted to me. On the on
e hand, of course, I was glad, for thefee was at
 least tenfold what I should have asked had I se
t a priceupon my own services, and it was possib
le that this order might lead toother ones. On t
he other hand, the face and manner of my patron 
hadmade an unpleasant impression upon me, and I 
could not think that hisexplanation of the fulle
rs-earth was sufficient to explain thenecessity 
for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxie
ty lest Ishould tell anyone of my errand. Howeve
r, I threw all fears to thewinds, ate a hearty s
upper, drove to Paddington, and started off,havi
ng obeyed to the letter the injunction as to hol
ding my tongue.At Reading I had to change not on
ly my carriage but my station.However, I was in 
time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached
 thelittle dim-lit station after eleven oclock. 
I was the only passengerwho got out there, and t
here was no one upon the platform save a singles
leepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out thr
ough the wicket gate,however, I found my acquain
tance of the morning waiting in the shadowupon t
he other side. Without a word he grasped my arm 
and hurried meinto a carriage, the door of which
 was standing open. He drew up thewindows on eit
her side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we w
ent asfast as the horse could go.One horse inter
jected Holmes.Yes, only one.Did you observe the 
colourYes, I saw it by the side-lights when I wa
s stepping into thecarriage. It was a chestnut.T
ired-looking or freshOh, fresh and glossy.Thank 
you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray co
ntinue your mostinteresting statement.Away we we
nt then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colo
nel LysanderStark had said that it was only seve
n miles, but I should think, fromthe rate that w
e seemed to go, and from the time that we took, 
that itmust have been nearer twelve. He sat at m
y side in silence all thetime, and I was aware, 
more than once when I glanced in his direction,t
hat he was looking at me with great intensity. T
he country roads seemto be not very good in that
 part of the world, for we lurched andjolted ter
ribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see
 something ofwhere we were, but they were made o
f frosted glass, and I could makeout nothing sav
e the occasional bright blur of a passing light.
 Now andthen I hazarded some remark to break the
 monotony of the journey, butthe colonel answere
d only in monosyllables, and the conversation so
onflagged. At last, however, the bumping of the 
road was exchanged forthe crisp smoothness of a 
gravel-drive, and the carriage came to astand. C
olonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I foll
owed after him,pulled me swiftly into a porch wh
ich gaped in front of us. We stepped,as it were,
 right out of the carriage and into the hall, so
 that Ifailed to catch the most fleeting glance 
of the front of the house. Theinstant that I had
 crossed the threshold the door slammed heavilyb
ehind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the 
wheels as the carriagedrove away.It was pitch da
rk inside the house, and the colonel fumbled abo
utlooking for matches and muttering under his br
eath. Suddenly a dooropened at the other end of 
the passage, and a long, golden bar of lightshot
 out in our direction. It grew broader, and a wo
man appeared with alamp in her hand, which she h
eld above her head, pushing her faceforward and 
peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, 
and fromthe gloss with which the light shone upo
n her dark dress I knew that itwas a rich materi
al. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in
 atone as though asking a question, and when my 
companion answered in agruff monosyllable she ga
ve such a start that the lamp nearly fell fromhe
r hand. Colonel Stark went up to her, whispered 
something in her ear,and then, pushing her back 
into the room from whence she had come, hewalked
 towards me again with the lamp in his hand.Perh
aps you will have the kindness to wait in this r
oom for a fewminutes, said he, throwing open ano
ther door. It was a quiet, little,plainly furnis
hed room, with a round table in the centre, on w
hichseveral German books were scattered. Colonel
 Stark laid down the lampon the top of a harmoni
um beside the door. I shall not keep youwaiting 
an instant, said he, and vanished into the darkn
ess.I glanced at the books upon the table, and i
n spite of my ignorance ofGerman I could see tha
t two of them were treatises on science, theothe
rs being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across
 to the window,hoping that I might catch some gl
impse of the country-side, but an oakshutter, he
avily barred, was folded across it. It was a won
derfullysilent house. There was an old clock tic
king loudly somewhere in thepassage, but otherwi
se everything was deadly still. A vague feeling 
ofuneasiness began to steal over me. Who were th
ese German people, andwhat were they doing livin
g in this strange, out-of-the-way place Andwhere
 was the place I was ten miles or so from Eyford
, that was all Iknew, but whether north, south, 
east, or west I had no idea. For thatmatter, Rea
ding, and possibly other large towns, were withi
n thatradius, so the place might not be so seclu
ded, after all. Yet it wasquite certain, from th
e absolute stillness, that we were in thecountry
. I paced up and down the room, humming a tune u
nder my breathto keep up my spirits and feeling 
that I was thoroughly earning myfifty-guinea fee
.Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the 
midst of the utterstillness, the door of my room
 swung slowly open. The woman wasstanding in the
 aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, 
theyellow light from my lamp beating upon her ea
ger and beautiful face. Icould see at a glance t
hat she was sick with fear, and the sight sent a
chill to my own heart. She held up one shaking f
inger to warn me to besilent, and she shot a few
 whispered words of broken English at me, hereye
s glancing back, like those of a frightened hors
e, into the gloombehind her.I would go, said she
, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to speakcalml
y; I would go. I should not stay here. There is 
no good for youto do.But, madam, said I, I have 
not yet done what I came for. I cannotpossibly l
eave until I have seen the machine.It is not wor
th your while to wait, she went on. You can pass
through the door; no one hinders. And then, seei
ng that I smiled andshook my head, she suddenly 
threw aside her constraint and made a stepforwar
d, with her hands wrung together. For the love o
f Heaven shewhispered, get away from here before
 it is too lateBut I am somewhat headstrong by n
ature, and the more ready to engagein an affair 
when there is some obstacle in the way. I though
t of myfifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey
, and of the unpleasant nightwhich seemed to be 
before me. Was it all to go for nothing Why shou
ldI slink away without having carried out my com
mission, and without thepayment which was my due
 This woman might, for all I knew, be amonomania
c. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her m
anner hadshaken me more than I cared to confess,
 I still shook my head anddeclared my intention 
of remaining where I was. She was about to renew
her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and
 the sound of severalfootsteps was heard upon th
e stairs. She listened for an instant, threwup h
er hands with a despairing gesture, and vanished
 as suddenly and asnoiselessly as she had come.T
he newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a s
hort thick man with achinchilla beard growing ou
t of the creases of his double chin, who wasintr
oduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.This is my secretar
y and manager, said the colonel. By the way, Iwa
s under the impression that I left this door shu
t just now. I fearthat you have felt the draught
.On the contrary, said I, I opened the door myse
lf because I feltthe room to be a little close.H
e shot one of his suspicious looks at me. Perhap
s we had betterproceed to business, then, said h
e. Mr. Ferguson and I will take youup to see the
 machine.I had better put my hat on, I suppose.O
h, no, it is in the house.What, you dig fullers-
earth in the houseNo, no. This is only where we 
compress it. But never mind that. Allwe wish you
 to do is to examine the machine and to let us k
now what iswrong with it.We went upstairs togeth
er, the colonel first with the lamp, the fatmana
ger and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an o
ld house, withcorridors, passages, narrow windin
g staircases, and little low doors,the threshold
s of which were hollowed out by the generations 
who hadcrossed them. There were no carpets and n
o signs of any furniture abovethe ground floor, 
while the plaster was peeling off the walls, and
 thedamp was breaking through in green, unhealth
y blotches. I tried to puton as unconcerned an a
ir as possible, but I had not forgotten thewarni
ngs of the lady, even though I disregarded them,
 and I kept a keeneye upon my two companions. Fe
rguson appeared to be a morose and silentman, bu
t I could see from the little that he said that 
he was at leasta fellow-countryman.Colonel Lysan
der Stark stopped at last before a low door, whi
ch heunlocked. Within was a small, square room, 
in which the three of uscould hardly get at one 
time. Ferguson remained outside, and thecolonel 
ushered me in.We are now, said he, actually with
in the hydraulic press, and itwould be a particu
larly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were to 
turnit on. The ceiling of this small chamber is 
really the end of thedescending piston, and it c
omes down with the force of many tons uponthis m
etal floor. There are small lateral columns of w
ater outsidewhich receive the force, and which t
ransmit and multiply it in themanner which is fa
miliar to you. The machine goes readily enough, 
butthere is some stiffness in the working of it,
 and it has lost a littleof its force. Perhaps y
ou will have the goodness to look it over and to
show us how we can set it right.I took the lamp 
from him, and I examined the machine very thorou
ghly.It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable o
f exercising enormouspressure. When I passed out
side, however, and pressed down the leverswhich 
controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing so
und that therewas a slight leakage, which allowe
d a regurgitation of water throughone of the sid
e cylinders. An examination showed that one of t
heindia-rubber bands which was round the head of
 a driving-rod had shrunkso as not quite to fill
 the socket along which it worked. This wasclear
ly the cause of the loss of power, and I pointed
 it out to mycompanions, who followed my remarks
 very carefully and asked severalpractical quest
ions as to how they should proceed to set it rig
ht. WhenI had made it clear to them, I returned 
to the main chamber of themachine and took a goo
d look at it to satisfy my own curiosity. It was
obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller
s-earth was the merestfabrication, for it would 
be absurd to suppose that so powerful anengine c
ould be designed for so inadequate a purpose. Th
e walls were ofwood, but the floor consisted of 
a large iron trough, and when I cameto examine i
t I could see a crust of metallic deposit all ov
er it. Ihad stooped and was scraping at this to 
see exactly what it was when Iheard a muttered e
xclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face
 ofthe colonel looking down at me.What are you d
oing there he asked.I felt angry at having been 
tricked by so elaborate a story as thatwhich he 
had told me. I was admiring your fullers-earth, 
said I; Ithink that I should be better able to a
dvise you as to your machine ifI knew what the e
xact purpose was for which it was used.The insta
nt that I uttered the words I regretted the rash
ness of myspeech. His face set hard, and a balef
ul light sprang up in his greyeyes.Very well, sa
id he, you shall know all about the machine. He 
tooka step backward, slammed the little door, an
d turned the key in thelock. I rushed towards it
 and pulled at the handle, but it was quitesecur
e, and did not give in the least to my kicks and
 shoves. HulloI yelled. Hullo Colonel Let me out
And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound
 which sent my heartinto my mouth. It was the cl
ank of the levers and the swish of theleaking cy
linder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp 
still stoodupon the floor where I had placed it 
when examining the trough. By itslight I saw tha
t the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slo
wly,jerkily, but, as none knew better than mysel
f, with a force which mustwithin a minute grind 
me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself,screaming
, against the door, and dragged with my nails at
 the lock. Iimplored the colonel to let me out, 
but the remorseless clanking of thelevers drowne
d my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two a
bove myhead, and with my hand upraised I could f
eel its hard, rough surface.Then it flashed thro
ugh my mind that the pain of my death would depe
ndvery much upon the position in which I met it.
 If I lay on my face theweight would come upon m
y spine, and I shuddered to think of thatdreadfu
l snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and yet, 
had I the nerveto lie and look up at that deadly
 black shadow wavering down upon meAlready I was
 unable to stand erect, when my eye caught somet
hing whichbrought a gush of hope back to my hear
t.I have said that though the floor and ceiling 
were of iron, the wallswere of wood. As I gave a
 last hurried glance around, I saw a thin lineof
 yellow light between two of the boards, which b
roadened andbroadened as a small panel was pushe
d backward. For an instant I couldhardly believe
 that here was indeed a door which led away from
 death.The next instant I threw myself through, 
and lay half-fainting upon theother side. The pa
nel had closed again behind me, but the crash of
 thelamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang
 of the two slabs of metal,told me how narrow ha
d been my escape.I was recalled to myself by a f
rantic plucking at my wrist, and Ifound myself l
ying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, 
while awoman bent over me and tugged at me with 
her left hand, while she helda candle in her rig
ht. It was the same good friend whose warning I 
hadso foolishly rejected.Come come she cried bre
athlessly. They will be here in a moment.They wi
ll see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste 
the so-precioustime, but comeThis time, at least
, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to myf
eet and ran with her along the corridor and down
 a winding stair. Thelatter led to another broad
 passage, and just as we reached it we heardthe 
sound of running feet and the shouting of two vo
ices, one answeringthe other from the floor on w
hich  we were and from the one beneath. Myguide 
stopped and looked about her like one  who is at
 her wits end.Then she threw open a door which l
ed into a bedroom, through the windowof which th
e moon was shining brightly.It is your only chan
ce, said she. It is high, but it may be thatyou 
can jump it.As she spoke a light sprang into vie
w at the further end of thepassage, and I saw th
e lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushingf
orward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon l
ike a butcherscleaver in the other. I rushed acr
oss the bedroom, flung open thewindow, and looke
d out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the gar
denlooked in the moonlight, and it could not be 
more than thirty feetdown. I clambered out upon 
the sill, but I hesitated to jump until Ishould 
have heard what passed between my saviour and th
e ruffian whopursued me. If she were ill-used, t
hen at any risks I was determined togo back to h
er assistance. The thought had hardly flashed th
rough mymind before he was at the door, pushing 
his way past her; but she threwher arms round hi
m and tried to hold him back.Fritz Fritz she cri
ed in English, remember your promise after thela
st time. You said it should not be again. He wil
l be silent Oh, hewill be silentYou are mad, Eli
se he shouted, struggling to break away from her
.You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too muc
h. Let me pass, I sayHe dashed her to one side, 
and, rushing to the window, cut at me withhis he
avy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging
 by the hands tothe sill, when his blow fell. I 
was conscious of a dull pain, my griploosened, a
nd I fell into the garden below.I was shaken but
 not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up and
rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could r
un, for I understoodthat I was far from being ou
t of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as Iran, a d
eadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I gla
nced down at myhand, which was throbbing painful
ly, and then, for the first time, sawthat my thu
mb had been cut off and that the blood was pouri
ng from mywound. I endeavoured to tie my handker
chief round it, but there came asudden buzzing i
n my ears, and next moment I fell in a dead fain
t amongthe rose-bushes.How long I remained uncon
scious I cannot tell. It must have been avery lo
ng time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright mor
ning wasbreaking when I came to myself. My cloth
es were all sodden with dew,and my coat-sleeve w
as drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. Th
esmarting of it recalled in an instant all the p
articulars of my nightsadventure, and I sprang t
o my feet with the feeling that I might hardlyye
t be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishme
nt, when I came tolook round me, neither house n
or garden were to be seen. I had beenlying in an
 angle of the hedge close by the high road, and 
just a littlelower down was a long building, whi
ch proved, upon my approaching it,to be the very
 station at which I had arrived upon the previou
s night.Were it not for the ugly wound upon my h
and, all that had passed duringthose dreadful ho
urs might have been an evil dream.Half dazed, I 
went into the station and asked about the mornin
g train.There would be one to Reading in less th
an an hour. The same porter wason duty, I found,
 as had been there when I arrived. I inquired of
 himwhether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysande
r Stark. The name wasstrange to him. Had he obse
rved a carriage the night before waiting forme N
o, he had not. Was there a police-station anywhe
re near There wasone about three miles off.It wa
s too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I
 determined towait until I got back to town befo
re telling my story to the police. Itwas a littl
e past six when I arrived, so I went first to ha
ve my wounddressed, and then the doctor was kind
 enough to bring me along here. Iput the case in
to your hands and shall do exactly what you advi
se.We both sat in silence for some little time a
fter listening to thisextraordinary narrative. T
hen Sherlock Holmes pulled down from theshelf on
e of the ponderous commonplace books in which he
 placed hiscuttings.Here is an advertisement whi
ch will interest you, said he. Itappeared in all
 the papers about a year ago. Listen to this Los
t, onthe 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged t
wenty-six, a hydraulicengineer. Left his lodging
s at ten oclock at night, and has not beenheard 
of since. Was dressed in, etc., etc. Ha That rep
resents thelast time that the colonel needed to 
have his machine overhauled, Ifancy.Good heavens
 cried my patient. Then that explains what the g
irlsaid.Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the 
colonel was a cool anddesperate man, who was abs
olutely determined that nothing should standin t
he way of his little game, like those out-and-ou
t pirates who willleave no survivor from a captu
red ship. Well, every moment now isprecious, so 
if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scot
land Yardat once as a preliminary to starting fo
r Eyford.Some three hours or so afterwards we we
re all in the train together,bound from Reading 
to the little Berkshire village. There were Sher
lockHolmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Br
adstreet, of Scotland Yard,a plain-clothes man, 
and myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnance ma
pof the county out upon the seat and was busy wi
th his compasses drawinga circle with Eyford for
 its centre.There you are, said he. That circle 
is drawn at a radius of tenmiles from the villag
e. The place we want must be somewhere near that
line. You said ten miles, I think, sir.It was an
 hours good drive.And you think that they brough
t you back all that way when you wereunconscious
They must have done so. I have a confused memory
, too, of having beenlifted and conveyed somewhe
re.What I cannot understand, said I, is why they
 should have spared youwhen they found you lying
 fainting in the garden. Perhaps the villainwas 
softened by the womans entreaties.I hardly think
 that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face
 in mylife.Oh, we shall soon clear up all that, 
said Bradstreet. Well, I havedrawn my circle, an
d I only wish I knew at what point upon it the f
olkthat we are in search of are to be found.I th
ink I could lay my finger on it, said Holmes qui
etly.Really, now cried the inspector, you have f
ormed your opinionCome, now, we shall see who ag
rees with you. I say it is south, for thecountry
 is more deserted there.And I say east, said my 
patient.I am for west, remarked the plain-clothe
s man. There are severalquiet little villages up
 there.And I am for north, said I, because there
 are no hills there, andour friend says that he 
did not notice the carriage go up any.Come, crie
d the inspector, laughing; its a very pretty div
ersity ofopinion. We have boxed the compass amon
g us. Who do you give yourcasting vote toYou are
 all wrong.But we cant all be.Oh, yes, you can. 
This is my point. He placed his finger in thecen
tre of the circle. This is where we shall find t
hem.But the twelve-mile drive gasped Hatherley.S
ix out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yo
urself that the horsewas fresh and glossy when y
ou got in. How could it be that if it hadgone tw
elve miles over heavy roadsIndeed, it is a likel
y ruse enough, observed Bradstreet thoughtfully.
Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature
 of this gang.None at all, said Holmes. They are
 coiners on a large scale, andhave used the mach
ine to form the amalgam which has taken the plac
e ofsilver.We have known for some time that a cl
ever gang was at work, said theinspector. They h
ave been turning out half-crowns by the thousand
. Weeven traced them as far as Reading, but coul
d get no farther, for theyhad covered their trac
es in a way that showed that they were very oldh
ands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I th
ink that we have gotthem right enough.But the in
spector was mistaken, for those criminals were n
ot destinedto fall into the hands of justice. As
 we rolled into Eyford Station wesaw a gigantic 
column of smoke which streamed up from behind a 
smallclump of trees in the neighbourhood and hun
g like an immense ostrichfeather over the landsc
ape.A house on fire asked Bradstreet as the trai
n steamed off again onits way.Yes, sir said the 
station-master.When did it break outI hear that 
it was during the night, sir, but it has got wor
se, andthe whole place is in a blaze.Whose house
 is itDr. Bechers.Tell me, broke in the engineer
, is Dr. Becher a German, very thin,with a long,
 sharp noseThe station-master laughed heartily. 
No, sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there i
snt a man in the parish who has a better-linedwa
istcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him
, a patient, as Iunderstand, who is a foreigner,
 and he looks as if a little goodBerkshire beef 
would do him no harm.The station-master had not 
finished his speech before we were allhastening 
in the direction of the fire. The road topped a 
low hill, andthere was a great widespread whitew
ashed building in front of us,spouting fire at e
very chink and window, while in the garden in fr
ontthree fire-engines were vainly striving to ke
ep the flames under.Thats it cried Hatherley, in
 intense excitement. There is thegravel-drive, a
nd there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That s
econdwindow is the one that I jumped from.Well, 
at least, said Holmes, you have had your revenge
 upon them.There can be no question that it was 
your oil-lamp which, when it wascrushed in the p
ress, set fire to the wooden walls, though no do
ubtthey were too excited in the chase after you 
to observe it at the time.Now keep your eyes ope
n in this crowd for your friends of last night,t
hough I very much fear that they are a good hund
red miles off by now.And Holmes fears came to be
 realised, for from that day to this noword has 
ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, t
he sinisterGerman, or the morose Englishman. Ear
ly that morning a peasant had meta cart containi
ng several people and some very bulky boxes driv
ingrapidly in the direction of Reading, but ther
e all traces of thefugitives disappeared, and ev
en Holmes ingenuity failed ever todiscover the l
east clue as to their whereabouts.The firemen ha
d been much perturbed at the strange arrangement
s whichthey had found within, and still more so 
by discovering a newly severedhuman thumb upon a
 window-sill of the second floor. About sunset,h
owever, their efforts were at last successful, a
nd they subdued theflames, but not before the ro
of had fallen in, and the whole place beenreduce
d to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted 
cylinders andiron piping, not a trace remained o
f the machinery which had cost ourunfortunate ac
quaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and
 of tinwere discovered stored in an out-house, b
ut no coins were to be found,which may have expl
ained the presence of those bulky boxes which ha
vebeen already referred to.How our hydraulic eng
ineer had been conveyed from the garden to thesp
ot where he recovered his senses might have rema
ined forever amystery were it not for the soft m
ould, which told us a very plaintale. He had evi
dently been carried down by two persons, one of 
whomhad remarkably small feet and the other unus
ually large ones. On thewhole, it was most proba
ble that the silent Englishman, being less boldo
r less murderous than his companion, had assiste
d the woman to bearthe unconscious man out of th
e way of danger.Well, said our engineer ruefully
 as we took our seats to return oncemore to Lond
on, it has been a pretty business for me I have 
lost mythumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee,
 and what have I gainedExperience, said Holmes, 
laughing. Indirectly it may be of value,you know
; you have only to put it into words to gain the
 reputation ofbeing excellent company for the re
mainder of your existence.X. THE ADVENTURE OF TH
E NOBLE BACHELORThe Lord St. Simon marriage, and
 its curious termination, have longceased to be 
a subject of interest in those exalted circles i
n whichthe unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh s
candals have eclipsed it, andtheir more piquant 
details have drawn the gossips away from thisfou
r-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, h
owever, that thefull facts have never been revea
led to the general public, and as myfriend Sherl
ock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing 
the matterup, I feel that no memoir of him would
 be complete without some littlesketch of this r
emarkable episode.It was a few weeks before my o
wn marriage, during the days when I wasstill sha
ring rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he 
came home froman afternoon stroll to find a lett
er on the table waiting for him. Ihad remained i
ndoors all day, for the weather had taken a sudd
en turnto rain, with high autumnal winds, and th
e jezail bullet which I hadbrought back in one o
f my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaignthrob
bed with dull persistence. With my body in one e
asy-chair and mylegs upon another, I had surroun
ded myself with a cloud of newspapersuntil at la
st, saturated with the news of the day, I tossed
 them allaside and lay listless, watching the hu
ge crest and monogram upon theenvelope upon the 
table and wondering lazily who my friends noblec
orrespondent could be.Here is a very fashionable
 epistle, I remarked as he entered. Yourmorning 
letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-m
onger and atide-waiter.Yes, my correspondence ha
s certainly the charm of variety, heanswered, sm
iling, and the humbler are usually the more inte
resting.This looks like one of those unwelcome s
ocial summonses which call upona man either to b
e bored or to lie.He broke the seal and glanced 
over the contents.Oh, come, it may prove to be s
omething of interest, after all.Not social, then
No, distinctly professional.And from a noble cli
entOne of the highest in England.My dear fellow,
 I congratulate you.I assure you, Watson, withou
t affectation, that the status of myclient is a 
matter of less moment to me than the interest of
 his case.It is just possible, however, that tha
t also may not be wanting in thisnew investigati
on. You have been reading the papers diligently 
of late,have you notIt looks like it, said I rue
fully, pointing to a huge bundle in thecorner. I
 have had nothing else to do.It is fortunate, fo
r you will perhaps be able to post me up. I read
nothing except the criminal news and the agony c
olumn. The latter isalways instructive. But if y
ou have followed recent events so closelyyou mus
t have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding
Oh, yes, with the deepest interest.That is well.
 The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord
 St.Simon. I will read it to you, and in return 
you must turn over thesepapers and let me have w
hatever bears upon the matter. This is what hesa
ys    MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,-Lord Backwate
r tells me that I may    place implicit reliance
 upon your judgment and discretion. I have    de
termined, therefore, to call upon you and to con
sult you in    reference to the very painful eve
nt which has occurred in    connection with my w
edding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, is    ac
ting already in the matter, but he assures me th
at he sees no    objection to your co-operation,
 and that he even thinks that it    might be of 
some assistance. I will call at four oclock in t
he    afternoon, and, should you have any other 
engagement at that time,    I hope that you will
 postpone it, as this matter is of paramount    
importance. Yours faithfully,    ROBERT ST. SIMO
N.It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written w
ith a quill pen, and thenoble lord has had the m
isfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outersi
de of his right little finger, remarked Holmes a
s he folded up theepistle.He says four oclock. I
t is three now. He will be here in an hour.Then 
I have just time, with your assistance, to get c
lear upon thesubject. Turn over those papers and
 arrange the extracts in their orderof time, whi
le I take a glance as to who our client is. He p
icked ared-covered volume from a line of books o
f reference beside themantelpiece. Here he is, s
aid he, sitting down and flattening it outupon h
is knee. Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simo
n, second sonof the Duke of Balmoral. Hum Arms A
zure, three caltrops in chiefover a fess sable. 
Born in 1846. Hes forty-one years of age, which 
ismature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for t
he colonies in a lateadministration. The Duke, h
is father, was at one time Secretary forForeign 
Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direc
t descent, andTudor on the distaff side. Ha Well
, there is nothing very instructivein all this. 
I think that I must turn to you Watson, for some
thing moresolid.I have very little difficulty in
 finding what I want, said I, forthe facts are q
uite recent, and the matter struck me as remarka
ble. Ifeared to refer them to you, however, as I
 knew that you had an inquiryon hand and that yo
u disliked the intrusion of other matters.Oh, yo
u mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Squar
e furniture van.That is quite cleared up now-tho
ugh, indeed, it was obvious from thefirst. Pray 
give me the results of your newspaper selections
.Here is the first notice which I can find. It i
s in the personalcolumn of the Morning Post, and
 dates, as you see, some weeks backA marriage ha
s been arranged, it says, and will, if rumour is
correct, very shortly take place, between Lord R
obert St. Simon, secondson of the Duke of Balmor
al, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter ofAl
oysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.
A. That is all.Terse and to the point, remarked 
Holmes, stretching his long, thinlegs towards th
e fire.There was a paragraph amplifying this in 
one of the society papers ofthe same week. Ah, h
ere it is There will soon be a call forprotectio
n in the marriage  market, for the present free-
tradeprinciple appears to tell heavily against o
ur home product. One by onethe management of the
 noble houses of Great Britain is passing into t
hehands of our fair cousins from across the Atla
ntic. An importantaddition has been made during 
the last week to the list of the prizeswhich hav
e been borne away by these charming invaders. Lo
rd St. Simon,who has shown himself for over twen
ty years proof against the littlegods arrows, ha
s now definitely announced his approaching marri
agewith Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daught
er of a Californiamillionaire. Miss Doran, whose
 graceful figure and striking faceattracted much
 attention at the Westbury House festivities, is
 an onlychild, and it is currently reported that
 her dowry will run toconsiderably over the six 
figures, with expectancies for the future. Asit 
is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has 
been compelled tosell his pictures within the la
st few years, and as Lord St. Simon hasno proper
ty of his own save the small estate of Birchmoor
, it isobvious that the Californian heiress is n
ot the only gainer by analliance which will enab
le her to make the easy and common transitionfro
m a Republican lady to a British peeress.Anythin
g else asked Holmes, yawning.Oh, yes; plenty. Th
en there is another note in the Morning Post tos
ay that the marriage would be an absolutely quie
t one, that it wouldbe at St. Georges, Hanover S
quare, that only half a dozen intimatefriends wo
uld be invited, and that the party would return 
to thefurnished house at Lancaster Gate which ha
s been taken by Mr. AloysiusDoran. Two days late
r-that is, on Wednesday last-there is a curtanno
uncement that the wedding had taken place, and t
hat the honeymoonwould be passed at Lord Backwat
ers place, near Petersfield. Those areall the no
tices which appeared before the disappearance of
 the bride.Before the what asked Holmes with a s
tart.The vanishing of the lady.When did she vani
sh, thenAt the wedding breakfast.Indeed. This is
 more interesting than it promised to be; quited
ramatic, in fact.Yes; it struck me as being a li
ttle out of the common.They often vanish before 
the ceremony, and occasionally during thehoneymo
on; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so 
prompt as this.Pray let me have the details.I wa
rn you that they are very incomplete.Perhaps we 
may make them less so.Such as they are, they are
 set forth in a single article of a morningpaper
 of yesterday, which I will read to you. It is h
eaded, SingularOccurrence at a Fashionable Weddi
ngThe family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been t
hrown into the greatestconsternation by the stra
nge and painful episodes which have takenplace i
n connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as 
shortlyannounced in the papers of yesterday, occ
urred on the previous morning;but it is only now
 that it has been possible to confirm the strang
erumours which have been so persistently floatin
g about. In spite of theattempts of the friends 
to hush the matter up, so much public attentionh
as now been drawn to it that no good purpose can
 be served byaffecting to disregard what is a co
mmon subject for conversation.The ceremony, whic
h was performed at St. Georges, Hanover Square,w
as a very quiet one, no one being present save t
he father of thebride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the D
uchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,Lord Eustace 
and Lady Clara St. Simon the younger brother and
 sisterof the bridegroom, and Lady Alicia Whitti
ngton. The whole partyproceeded afterwards to th
e house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at LancasterGate,
 where breakfast had been prepared. It appears t
hat some littletrouble was caused by a woman, wh
ose name has not been ascertained, whoendeavoure
d to force her way into the house after the brid
al party,alleging that she had some claim upon L
ord St. Simon. It was only aftera painful and pr
olonged scene that she was ejected by the butler
 andthe footman. The bride, who had fortunately 
entered the house beforethis unpleasant interrup
tion, had sat down to breakfast with the rest,wh
en she complained of a sudden indisposition and 
retired to her room.Her prolonged absence having
 caused some comment, her father followedher, bu
t learned from her maid that she had only come u
p to her chamberfor an instant, caught up an uls
ter and bonnet, and hurried down to thepassage. 
One of the footmen declared that he had seen a l
ady leave thehouse thus apparelled, but had refu
sed to credit that it was hismistress, believing
 her to be with the company. On ascertaining tha
this daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Dora
n, in conjunction withthe bridegroom, instantly 
put themselves in communication with thepolice, 
and very energetic inquiries are being made, whi
ch willprobably result in a speedy clearing up o
f this very singular business.Up to a late hour 
last night, however, nothing had transpired as t
o thewhereabouts of the missing lady. There are 
rumours of foul play in thematter, and it is sai
d that the police have caused the arrest of thew
oman who had caused the original disturbance, in
 the belief that, fromjealousy or some other mot
ive, she may have been concerned in thestrange d
isappearance of the bride.And is that allOnly on
e little item in another of the morning papers, 
but it is asuggestive one.And it is-That Miss Fl
ora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturba
nce, hasactually been arrested. It appears that 
she was formerly a danseuseat the Allegro, and t
hat she has known the bridegroom for some years.
There are no further particulars, and the whole 
case is in your handsnow-so far as it has been s
et forth in the public press.And an exceedingly 
interesting case it appears to be. I would not h
avemissed it for worlds. But there is a ring at 
the bell, Watson, and asthe clock makes it a few
 minutes after four, I have no doubt that thiswi
ll prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of
 going, Watson, for Ivery much prefer having a w
itness, if only as a check to my ownmemory.Lord 
Robert St. Simon, announced our page-boy, throwi
ng open thedoor. A gentleman entered, with a ple
asant, cultured face, high-nosedand pale, with s
omething perhaps of petulance about the mouth, a
nd withthe steady, well-opened eye of a man whos
e pleasant lot it had everbeen to command and to
 be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yet hisgen
eral appearance gave an undue impression of age,
 for he had a slightforward stoop and a little b
end of the knees as he walked. His hair,too, as 
he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was gri
zzled round theedges and thin upon the top. As t
o his dress, it was careful to theverge of foppi
shness, with high collar, black frock-coat, whit
ewaistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes,
 and light-colouredgaiters. He advanced slowly i
nto the room, turning his head from leftto right
, and swinging in his right hand the cord which 
held his goldeneyeglasses.Good-day, Lord St. Sim
on, said Holmes, rising and bowing. Pray takethe
 basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, 
Dr. Watson. Draw upa little to the fire, and we 
will talk this matter over.A most painful matter
 to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.Holm
es. I have been cut to the quick. I understand t
hat you havealready managed several delicate cas
es of this sort, sir, though Ipresume that they 
were hardly from the same class of society.No, I
 am descending.I beg pardon.My last client of th
e sort was a king.Oh, really I had no idea. And 
which kingThe King of Scandinavia.What Had he lo
st his wifeYou can understand, said Holmes suave
ly, that I extend to theaffairs of my other clie
nts the same secrecy which I promise to you inyo
urs.Of course Very right very right Im sure I be
g pardon. As to my owncase, I am ready to give y
ou any information which may assist you informin
g an opinion.Thank you. I have already learned a
ll that is in the public prints,nothing more. I 
presume that I may take it as correct-this artic
le, forexample, as to the disappearance of the b
ride.Lord St. Simon glanced over it. Yes, it is 
correct, as far as itgoes.But it needs a great d
eal of supplementing before anyone could offeran
 opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts 
most directly byquestioning you.Pray do so.When 
did you first meet Miss Hatty DoranIn San Franci
sco, a year ago.You were travelling in the State
sYes.Did you become engaged thenNo.But you were 
on a friendly footingI was amused by her society
, and she could see that I was amused.Her father
 is very richHe is said to be the richest man on
 the Pacific slope.And how did he make his money
In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then 
he struck gold,invested it, and came up by leaps
 and bounds.Now, what is your own impression as 
to the young ladys-your wifescharacterThe noblem
an swung his glasses a little faster and stared 
down into thefire. You see, Mr. Holmes, said he,
 my wife was twenty before herfather became a ri
ch man. During that time she ran free in a minin
gcamp and wandered through woods or mountains, s
o that her education hascome from Nature rather 
than from the schoolmaster. She is what we calli
n England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild a
nd free, unfettered byany sort of traditions. Sh
e is impetuous-volcanic, I was about to say.She 
is swift in making up her mind and fearless in c
arrying out herresolutions. On the other hand, I
 would not have given her the namewhich I have t
he honour to bear-he gave a little stately cough
-had Inot thought her to be at bottom a noble wo
man. I believe that she iscapable of heroic self
-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would
be repugnant to her.Have you her photographI bro
ught this with me. He opened a locket and showed
 us the fullface of a very lovely woman. It was 
not a photograph but an ivoryminiature, and the 
artist had brought out the full effect of thelus
trous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the e
xquisite mouth.Holmes gazed long and earnestly a
t it. Then he closed the locket andhanded it bac
k to Lord St. Simon.The young lady came to Londo
n, then, and you renewed youracquaintanceYes, he
r father brought her over for this last London s
eason. I mether several times, became engaged to
 her, and have now married her.She brought, I un
derstand, a considerable dowryA fair dowry. Not 
more than is usual in my family.And this, of cou
rse, remains to you, since the marriage is a fai
taccompliI really have made no inquiries on the 
subject.Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Dor
an on the day before theweddingYes.Was she in go
od spiritsNever better. She kept talking of what
 we should do in our futurelives.Indeed That is 
very interesting. And on the morning of the wedd
ingShe was as bright as possible-at least until 
after the ceremony.And did you observe any chang
e in her thenWell, to tell the truth, I saw then
 the first signs that I had everseen that her te
mper was just a little sharp. The incident howev
er, wastoo trivial to relate and can have no pos
sible bearing upon the case.Pray let us have it,
 for all that.Oh, it is childish. She dropped he
r bouquet as we went towards thevestry. She was 
passing the front pew at the time, and it fell o
verinto the pew. There was a moments delay, but 
the gentleman in the pewhanded it up to her agai
n, and it did not appear to be the worse forthe 
fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she
 answered meabruptly; and in the carriage, on ou
r way home, she seemed absurdlyagitated over thi
s trifling cause.Indeed You say that there was a
 gentleman in the pew. Some of thegeneral public
 were present, thenOh, yes. It is impossible to 
exclude them when the church is open.This gentle
man was not one of your wifes friendsNo, no; I c
all him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quit
e acommon-looking person. I hardly noticed his a
ppearance. But really Ithink that we are wanderi
ng rather far from the point.Lady St. Simon, the
n, returned from the wedding in a less cheerfulf
rame of mind than she had gone to it. What did s
he do on re-enteringher fathers houseI saw her i
n conversation with her maid.And who is her maid
Alice is her name. She is an American and came f
rom California withher.A confidential servantA l
ittle too much so. It seemed to me that her mist
ress allowed her totake great liberties. Still, 
of course, in America they look upon thesethings
 in a different way.How long did she speak to th
is AliceOh, a few minutes. I had something else 
to think of.You did not overhear what they saidL
ady St. Simon said something about jumping a cla
im. She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind. 
I have no idea what she meant.American slang is 
very expressive sometimes. And what did your wif
e dowhen she finished speaking to her maidShe wa
lked into the breakfast-room.On your armNo, alon
e. She was very independent in little matters li
ke that. Then,after we had sat down for ten minu
tes or so, she rose hurriedly,muttered some word
s of apology, and left the room. She never cameb
ack.But this maid, Alice, as I understand, depos
es that she went to herroom, covered her brides 
dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,and we
nt out.Quite so. And she was afterwards seen wal
king into Hyde Park incompany with Flora Millar,
 a woman who is now in custody, and who hadalrea
dy made a disturbance at Mr. Dorans house that m
orning.Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars 
as to this young lady, andyour relations to her.
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised
 his eyebrows. We havebeen on a friendly footing
 for some years-I may say on a veryfriendly foot
ing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not t
reated herungenerously, and she had no just caus
e of complaint against me, butyou know what wome
n are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing
, butexceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attach
ed to me. She wrote medreadful letters when she 
heard that I was about to be married, and, totel
l the truth, the reason why I had the marriage c
elebrated so quietlywas that I feared lest there
 might be a scandal in the church. She cameto Mr
. Dorans door just after we returned, and she en
deavoured to pushher way in, uttering very abusi
ve expressions towards my wife, and eventhreaten
ing her, but I had foreseen the possibility of s
omething of thesort, and I had two police fellow
s there in private clothes, who soonpushed her o
ut again. She was quiet when she saw that there 
was no goodin making a row.Did your wife hear al
l thisNo, thank goodness, she did not.And she wa
s seen walking with this very woman afterwardsYe
s. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, 
looks upon as soserious. It is thought that Flor
a decoyed my wife out and laid someterrible trap
 for her.Well, it is a possible supposition.You 
think so, tooI did not say a probable one. But y
ou do not yourself look upon thisas likelyI do n
ot think Flora would hurt a fly.Still, jealousy 
is a strange transformer of characters. Pray wha
t isyour own theory as to what took placeWell, r
eally, I came to seek a theory, not to propound 
one. I havegiven you all the facts. Since you as
k me, however, I may say that ithas occurred to 
me as possible that the excitement of this affai
r, theconsciousness that she had made so immense
 a social stride, had theeffect of causing some 
little nervous disturbance in my wife.In short, 
that she had become suddenly derangedWell, reall
y, when I consider that she has turned her back-
I will notsay upon me, but upon so much that man
y have aspired to withoutsuccess-I can hardly ex
plain it in any other fashion.Well, certainly th
at is also a conceivable hypothesis, said Holmes
,smiling. And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that 
I have nearly all mydata. May I ask whether you 
were seated at the breakfast-table so thatyou co
uld see out of the windowWe could see the other 
side of the road and the Park.Quite so. Then I d
o not think that I need to detain you longer. Is
hall communicate with you.Should you be fortunat
e enough to solve this problem, said ourclient, 
rising.I have solved it.Eh What was thatI say th
at I have solved it.Where, then, is my wifeThat 
is a detail which I shall speedily supply.Lord S
t. Simon shook his head. I am afraid that it wil
l take wiserheads than yours or mine, he remarke
d, and bowing in a stately,old-fashioned manner 
he departed.It is very good of Lord St. Simon to
 honour my head by putting it on alevel with his
 own, said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. I think th
at Ishall have a whisky and soda and a cigar aft
er all thiscross-questioning. I had formed my co
nclusions as to the case beforeour client came i
nto the room.My dear HolmesI have notes of sever
al similar cases, though none, as I remarkedbefo
re, which were quite as prompt. My whole examina
tion served to turnmy conjecture into a certaint
y. Circumstantial evidence is occasionallyvery c
onvincing, as when you find a trout in the milk,
 to quoteThoreaus example.But I have heard all t
hat you have heard.Without, however, the knowled
ge of pre-existing cases which serves meso well.
 There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some 
years back, andsomething on very much the same l
ines at Munich the year after theFranco-Prussian
 War. It is one of these cases-but, hullo, here 
isLestrade Good-afternoon, Lestrade You will fin
d an extra tumbler uponthe sideboard, and there 
are cigars in the box.The official detective was
 attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, whichgave h
im a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carri
ed a black canvasbag in his hand. With a short g
reeting he seated himself and lit thecigar which
 had been offered to him.Whats up, then asked Ho
lmes with a twinkle in his eye. You lookdissatis
fied.And I feel dissatisfied. It is this inferna
l St. Simon marriage case.I can make neither hea
d nor tail of the business.Really You surprise m
e.Who ever heard of such a mixed affair Every cl
ue seems to slipthrough my fingers. I have been 
at work upon it all day.And very wet it seems to
 have made you, said Holmes laying his handupon 
the arm of the pea-jacket.Yes, I have been dragg
ing the Serpentine.In Heavens name, what forIn s
earch of the body of Lady St. Simon.Sherlock Hol
mes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartil
y.Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square
 fountain he asked.Why What do you meanBecause y
ou have just as good a chance of finding this la
dy in the oneas in the other.Lestrade shot an an
gry glance at my companion. I suppose you know a
llabout it, he snarled.Well, I have only just he
ard the facts, but my mind is made up.Oh, indeed
 Then you think that the Serpentine plays no par
t in thematterI think it very unlikely.Then perh
aps you will kindly explain how it is that we fo
und this init He opened his bag as he spoke, and
 tumbled onto the floor awedding-dress of watere
d silk, a pair of white satin shoes and abrides 
wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in w
ater. There,said he, putting a new wedding-ring 
upon the top of the pile. There isa little nut f
or you to crack, Master Holmes.Oh, indeed said m
y friend, blowing blue rings into the air. Youdr
agged them from the SerpentineNo. They were foun
d floating near the margin by a park-keeper. The
yhave been identified as her clothes, and it see
med to me that if theclothes were there the body
 would not be far off.By the same brilliant reas
oning, every mans body is to be found inthe neig
hbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you
 hope to arriveat through thisAt some evidence i
mplicating Flora Millar in the disappearance.I a
m afraid that you will find it difficult.Are you
, indeed, now cried Lestrade with some bitternes
s. I amafraid, Holmes, that you are not very pra
ctical with your deductionsand your inferences. 
You have made two blunders in as many minutes.Th
is dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.And ho
wIn the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a ca
rd-case. In thecard-case is a note. And here is 
the very note. He slapped it downupon the table 
in front of him. Listen to this You will see me 
whenall is ready. Come at once. F. H. M. Now my 
theory all along has beenthat Lady St. Simon was
 decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she,with
 confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her
 disappearance.Here, signed with her initials, i
s the very note which was no doubtquietly slippe
d into her hand at the door and which lured her 
withintheir reach.Very good, Lestrade, said Holm
es, laughing. You really are very fineindeed. Le
t me see it. He took up the paper in a listless 
way, but hisattention instantly became riveted, 
and he gave a little cry ofsatisfaction. This is
 indeed important, said he.Ha you find it soExtr
emely so. I congratulate you warmly.Lestrade ros
e in his triumph and bent his head to look. Why,
 heshrieked, youre looking at the wrong sideOn t
he contrary, this is the right side.The right si
de Youre mad Here is the note written in pencil 
overhere.And over here is what appears to be the
 fragment of a hotel bill,which interests me dee
ply.Theres nothing in it. I looked at it before,
 said Lestrade. Oct.4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s
. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s.6d., glass sherry,
 8d. I see nothing in that.Very likely not. It i
s most important, all the same. As to the note,i
t is important also, or at least the initials ar
e, so I congratulateyou again.Ive wasted time en
ough, said Lestrade, rising. I believe in hardwo
rk and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine 
theories. Good-day,Mr. Holmes, and we shall see 
which gets to the bottom of the matterfirst. He 
gathered up the garments, thrust them into the b
ag, and madefor the door.Just one hint to you, L
estrade, drawled Holmes before his rivalvanished
; I will tell you the true solution of the matte
r. Lady St.Simon is a myth. There is not, and th
ere never has been, any suchperson.Lestrade look
ed sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, 
tapped hisforehead three times, shook his head s
olemnly, and hurried away.He had hardly shut the
 door behind him when Holmes rose to put on hiso
vercoat. There is something in what the fellow s
ays about outdoorwork, he remarked, so I think, 
Watson, that I must leave you to yourpapers for 
a little.It was after five oclock when Sherlock 
Holmes left me, but I had notime to be lonely, f
or within an hour there arrived a confectionersm
an with a very large flat box. This he unpacked 
with the help of ayouth whom he had brought with
 him, and presently, to my very greatastonishmen
t, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to
 be laid outupon our humble lodging-house mahoga
ny. There were a couple of brace ofcold woodcock
, a pheasant, a pt de foie gras pie with a group
 ofancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out
 all these luxuries, mytwo visitors vanished awa
y, like the genii of the Arabian Nights, withno 
explanation save that the things had been paid f
or and were orderedto this address.Just before n
ine oclock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into 
the room.His features were gravely set, but ther
e was a light in his eye whichmade me think that
 he had not been disappointed in his conclusions
.They have laid the supper, then, he said, rubbi
ng his hands.You seem to expect company. They ha
ve laid for five.Yes, I fancy we may have some c
ompany dropping in, said he. I amsurprised that 
Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha I fan
cy thatI hear his step now upon the stairs.It wa
s indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came b
ustling in,dangling his glasses more vigorously 
than ever, and with a veryperturbed expression u
pon his aristocratic features.My messenger reach
ed you, then asked Holmes.Yes, and I confess tha
t the contents startled me beyond measure. Havey
ou good authority for what you sayThe best possi
ble.Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed 
his hand over his forehead.What will the Duke sa
y, he murmured, when he hears that one of thefam
ily has been subjected to such humiliationIt is 
the purest accident. I cannot allow that there i
s anyhumiliation.Ah, you look on these things fr
om another standpoint.I fail to see that anyone 
is to blame. I can hardly see how the ladycould 
have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method o
f doing it wasundoubtedly to be regretted. Havin
g no mother, she had no one to adviseher at such
 a crisis.It was a slight, sir, a public slight,
 said Lord St. Simon, tappinghis fingers upon th
e table.You must make allowance for this poor gi
rl, placed in so unprecedenteda position.I will 
make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I
 have beenshamefully used.I think that I heard a
 ring, said Holmes. Yes, there are steps onthe l
anding. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenie
nt view of thematter, Lord St. Simon, I have bro
ught an advocate here who may be moresuccessful.
 He opened the door and ushered in a lady and ge
ntleman.Lord St. Simon, said he allow me to intr
oduce you to Mr. and Mrs.Francis Hay Moulton. Th
e lady, I think, you have already met.At the sig
ht of these newcomers our client had sprung from
 his seat andstood very erect, with his eyes cas
t down and his hand thrust into thebreast of his
 frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The 
lady hadtaken a quick step forward and had held 
out her hand to him, but hestill refused to rais
e his eyes. It was as well for his resolution,pe
rhaps, for her pleading face was one which it wa
s hard to resist.Youre angry, Robert, said she. 
Well, I guess you have every causeto be.Pray mak
e no apology to me, said Lord St. Simon bitterly
.Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real ba
d and that I shouldhave spoken to you before I w
ent; but I was kind of rattled, and fromthe time
 when I saw Frank here again I just didnt know w
hat I wasdoing or saying. I only wonder I didnt 
fall down and do a faint rightthere before the a
ltar.Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my fr
iend and me to leave theroom while you explain t
his matterIf I may give an opinion, remarked the
 strange gentleman, weve hadjust a little too mu
ch secrecy over this business already. For my pa
rt,I should like all Europe and America to hear 
the rights of it. He wasa small, wiry, sunburnt 
man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alertma
nner.Then Ill tell our story right away, said th
e lady. Frank here and Imet in 84, in McQuires c
amp, near the Rockies, where Pa was working acla
im. We were engaged to each other, Frank and I; 
but then one dayfather struck a rich pocket and 
made a pile, while poor Frank here hada claim th
at petered out and came to nothing. The richer P
a grew thepoorer was Frank; so at last Pa wouldn
t hear of our engagement lastingany longer, and 
he took me away to Frisco. Frank wouldnt throw u
p hishand, though; so he followed me there, and 
he saw me without Pa knowinganything about it. I
t would only have made him mad to know, so we ju
stfixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that
 he would go and make hispile, too, and never co
me back to claim me until he had as much as Pa.S
o then I promised to wait for him to the end of 
time and pledgedmyself not to marry anyone else 
while he lived. Why shouldnt we bemarried right 
away, then, said he, and then I will feel sure o
f you;and I wont claim to be your husband until 
I come back Well, wetalked it over, and he had f
ixed it all up so nicely, with a clergymanall re
ady in waiting, that we just did it right there;
 and then Frankwent off to seek his fortune, and
 I went back to Pa.The next I heard of Frank was
 that he was in Montana, and then he wentprospec
ting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from Ne
w Mexico. Afterthat came a long newspaper story 
about how a miners camp had beenattacked by Apac
he Indians, and there was my Franks name among t
hekilled. I fainted dead away, and I was very si
ck for months after. Pathought I had a decline a
nd took me to half the doctors in Frisco. Nota w
ord of news came for a year and more, so that I 
never doubted thatFrank was really dead. Then Lo
rd St. Simon came to Frisco, and we cameto Londo
n, and a marriage was arranged, and Pa was very 
pleased, but Ifelt all the time that no man on t
his earth would ever take the placein my heart t
hat had been given to my poor Frank.Still, if I 
had married Lord St. Simon, of course Id have do
ne myduty by him. We cant command our love, but 
we can our actions. I wentto the altar with him 
with the intention to make him just as good awif
e as it was in me to be. But you may imagine wha
t I felt when, justas I came to the altar rails,
 I glanced back and saw Frank standing andlookin
g at me out of the first pew. I thought it was h
is ghost atfirst; but when I looked again there 
he was still, with a kind ofquestion in his eyes
, as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry t
osee him. I wonder I didnt drop. I know that eve
rything was turninground, and the words of the c
lergyman were just like the buzz of a beein my e
ar. I didnt know what to do. Should I stop the s
ervice and makea scene in the church I glanced a
t him again, and he seemed to knowwhat I was thi
nking, for he raised his finger to his lips to t
ell me tobe still. Then I saw him scribble on a 
piece of paper, and I knew thathe was writing me
 a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I dr
oppedmy bouquet over to him, and he slipped the 
note into my hand when hereturned me the flowers
. It was only a line asking me to join him whenh
e made the sign to me to do so. Of course I neve
r doubted for a momentthat my first duty was now
 to him, and I determined to do just whateverhe 
might direct.When I got back I told my maid, who
 had known him in California, andhad always been
 his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but t
o get afew things packed and my ulster ready. I 
know I ought to have spoken toLord St. Simon, bu
t it was dreadful hard before his mother and all
those great people. I just made up my mind to ru
n away and explainafterwards. I hadnt been at th
e table ten minutes before I saw Frankout of the
 window at the other side of the road. He beckon
ed to me andthen began walking into the Park. I 
slipped out, put on my things, andfollowed him. 
Some woman came talking something or other about
 Lord St.Simon to me-seemed to me from the littl
e I heard as if he had a littlesecret of his own
 before marriage also-but I managed to get away 
fromher and soon overtook Frank. We got into a c
ab together, and away wedrove to some lodgings h
e had taken in Gordon Square, and that was mytru
e wedding after all those years of waiting. Fran
k had been aprisoner among the Apaches, had esca
ped, came on to Frisco, found thatI had given hi
m up for dead and had gone to England, followed 
me there,and had come upon me at last on the ver
y morning of my second wedding.I saw it in a pap
er, explained the American. It gave the name and
the church but not where the lady lived.Then we 
had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank wa
s all foropenness, but I was so ashamed of it al
l that I felt as if I shouldlike to vanish away 
and never see any of them again-just sending a l
ineto Pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive.
 It was awful to me tothink of all those lords a
nd ladies sitting round that breakfast-tableand 
waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my we
dding-clothes andthings and made a bundle of the
m, so that I should not be traced, anddropped th
em away somewhere where no one could find them. 
It is likelythat we should have gone on to Paris
 to-morrow, only that this goodgentleman, Mr. Ho
lmes, came round to us this evening, though how 
hefound us is more than I can think, and he show
ed us very clearly andkindly that I was wrong an
d that Frank was right, and that we should beput
ting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret
. Then he offered togive us a chance of talking 
to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we cameright awa
y round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you h
ave heard itall, and I am very sorry if I have g
iven you pain, and I hope that youdo not think v
ery meanly of me.Lord St. Simon had by no means 
relaxed his rigid attitude, but hadlistened with
 a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this lo
ngnarrative.Excuse me, he said, but it is not my
 custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affa
irs in this public manner.Then you wont forgive 
me You wont shake hands before I goOh, certainly
, if it would give you any pleasure. He put out 
his handand coldly grasped that which she extend
ed to him.I had hoped, suggested Holmes, that yo
u would have joined us in afriendly supper.I thi
nk that there you ask a little too much, respond
ed his Lordship.I may be forced to acquiesce in 
these recent developments, but I canhardly be ex
pected to make merry over them. I think that wit
h yourpermission I will now wish you all a very 
good-night. He included usall in a sweeping bow 
and stalked out of the room.Then I trust that yo
u at least will honour me with your company, sai
dSherlock Holmes. It is always a joy to meet an 
American, Mr. Moulton,for I am one of those who 
believe that the folly of a monarch and theblund
ering of a minister in far-gone years will not p
revent ourchildren from being some day citizens 
of the same world-wide countryunder a flag which
 shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with th
eStars and Stripes.The case has been an interest
ing one, remarked Holmes when ourvisitors had le
ft us, because it serves to show very clearly ho
wsimple the explanation may be of an affair whic
h at first sight seemsto be almost inexplicable.
 Nothing could be more natural than thesequence 
of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing 
stranger thanthe result when viewed, for instanc
e, by Mr. Lestrade of ScotlandYard.You were not 
yourself at fault at all, thenFrom the first, tw
o facts were very obvious to me, the one that th
elady had been quite willing to undergo the wedd
ing ceremony, the otherthat she had repented of 
it within a few minutes of returning home.Obviou
sly something had occurred during the morning, t
hen, to cause herto change her mind. What could 
that something be She could not havespoken to an
yone when she was out, for she had been in the c
ompany ofthe bridegroom. Had she seen someone, t
hen If she had, it must besomeone from America b
ecause she had spent so short a time in thiscoun
try that she could hardly have allowed anyone to
 acquire so deep aninfluence over her that the m
ere sight of him would induce her tochange her p
lans so completely. You see we have already arri
ved, by aprocess of exclusion, at the idea that 
she might have seen an American.Then who could t
his American be, and why should he possess so mu
chinfluence over her It might be a lover; it mig
ht be a husband. Heryoung womanhood had, I knew,
 been spent in rough scenes and understrange con
ditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lo
rd St.Simons narrative. When he told us of a man
 in a pew, of the change inthe brides manner, of
 so transparent a device for obtaining a note as
the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her 
confidential maid, andof her very significant al
lusion to claim-jumping-which in minersparlance 
means taking possession of that which another pe
rson has aprior claim to-the whole situation bec
ame absolutely clear. She hadgone off with a man
, and the man was either a lover or was a previo
ushusband-the chances being in favour of the lat
ter.And how in the world did you find themIt mig
ht have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held
 information inhis hands the value of which he d
id not himself know. The initialswere, of course
, of the highest importance, but more valuable s
till wasit to know that within a week he had set
tled his bill at one of themost select London ho
tels.How did you deduce the selectBy the select 
prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence
 for aglass of sherry pointed to one of the most
 expensive hotels. There arenot many in London w
hich charge at that rate. In the second one whic
h Ivisited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned b
y an inspection of thebook that Francis H. Moult
on, an American gentleman, had left only theday 
before, and on looking over the entries against 
him, I came uponthe very items which I had seen 
in the duplicate bill. His letters wereto be for
warded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travel
led, and beingfortunate enough to find the lovin
g couple at home, I ventured to givethem some pa
ternal advice and to point out to them that it w
ould bebetter in every way that they should make
 their position a littleclearer both to the gene
ral public and to Lord St. Simon in particular.I
 invited them to meet him here, and, as you see,
 I made him keep theappointment.But with no very
 good result, I remarked. His conduct was certai
nlynot very gracious.Ah, Watson, said Holmes, sm
iling, perhaps you would not be verygracious eit
her, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wed
ding, youfound yourself deprived in an instant o
f wife and of fortune. I thinkthat we may judge 
Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our sta
rsthat we are never likely to find ourselves in 
the same position. Drawyour chair up and hand me
 my violin, for the only problem we have stillto
 solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal
 evenings.XI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET
Holmes, said I as I stood one morning in our bow
-window looking downthe street, here is a madman
 coming along. It seems rather sad thathis relat
ives should allow him to come out alone.My frien
d rose lazily from his armchair and stood with h
is hands in thepockets of his dressing-gown, loo
king over my shoulder. It was abright, crisp Feb
ruary morning, and the snow of the day before st
illlay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly
 in the wintry sun. Downthe centre of Baker Stre
et it had been ploughed into a brown crumblyband
 by the traffic, but at either side and on the h
eaped-up edges ofthe footpaths it still lay as w
hite as when it fell. The grey pavementhad been 
cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously s
lippery, sothat there were fewer passengers than
 usual. Indeed, from the directionof the Metropo
litan Station no one was coming save the single 
gentlemanwhose eccentric conduct had drawn my at
tention.He was a man of about fifty, tall, portl
y, and imposing, with amassive, strongly marked 
face and a commanding figure. He was dressedin a
 sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shi
ning hat, neatbrown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-
grey trousers. Yet his actions werein absurd con
trast to the dignity of his dress and features, 
for he wasrunning hard, with occasional little s
prings, such as a weary man giveswho is little a
ccustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ra
n hejerked his hands up and down, waggled his he
ad, and writhed his faceinto the most extraordin
ary contortions.What on earth can be the matter 
with him I asked. He is looking upat the numbers
 of the houses.I believe that he is coming here,
 said Holmes, rubbing his hands.HereYes; I rathe
r think he is coming to consult me professionall
y. I thinkthat I recognise the symptoms. Ha did 
I not tell you As he spoke,the man, puffing and 
blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at our be
lluntil the whole house resounded with the clang
ing.A few moments later he was in our room, stil
l puffing, stillgesticulating, but with so fixed
 a look of grief and despair in hiseyes that our
 smiles were turned in an instant to horror and 
pity. Fora while he could not get his words out,
 but swayed his body and pluckedat his hair like
 one who has been driven to the extreme limits o
f hisreason. Then, suddenly springing to his fee
t, he beat his head againstthe wall with such fo
rce that we both rushed upon him and tore him aw
ayto the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pus
hed him down into theeasy-chair and, sitting bes
ide him, patted his hand and chatted withhim in 
the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well h
ow to employ.You have come to me to tell your st
ory, have you not said he. Youare fatigued with 
your haste. Pray wait until you have recoveredyo
urself, and then I shall be most happy to look i
nto any littleproblem which you may submit to me
.The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving
 chest, fighting againsthis emotion. Then he pas
sed his handkerchief over his brow, set hislips 
tight, and turned his face towards us.No doubt y
ou think me mad said he.I see that you have had 
some great trouble, responded Holmes.God knows I
 have-a trouble which is enough to unseat my rea
son, sosudden and so terrible is it. Public disg
race I might have faced,although I am a man whos
e character has never yet borne a stain.Private 
affliction also is the lot of every man; but the
 two comingtogether, and in so frightful a form,
 have been enough to shake my verysoul. Besides,
 it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land
 maysuffer unless some way be found out of this 
horrible affair.Pray compose yourself, sir, said
 Holmes, and let me have a clearaccount of who y
ou are and what it is that has befallen you.My n
ame, answered our visitor, is probably familiar 
to your ears. Iam Alexander Holder, of the banki
ng firm of Holder  Stevenson, ofThreadneedle Str
eet.The name was indeed well known to us as belo
nging to the senior partnerin the second largest
 private banking concern in the City of London.W
hat could have happened, then, to bring one of t
he foremost citizensof London to this most pitia
ble pass We waited, all curiosity, untilwith ano
ther effort he braced himself to tell his story.
I feel that time is of value, said he; that is w
hy I hastened herewhen the police inspector sugg
ested that I should secure yourco-operation. I c
ame to Baker Street by the Underground and hurri
edfrom there on foot, for the cabs go slowly thr
ough this snow. That iswhy I was so out of breat
h, for I am a man who takes very littleexercise.
 I feel better now, and I will put the facts bef
ore you asshortly and yet as clearly as I can.It
 is, of course, well known to you that in a succ
essful bankingbusiness as much depends upon our 
being able to find remunerativeinvestments for o
ur funds as upon our increasing our connection a
nd thenumber of our depositors. One of our most 
lucrative means of laying outmoney is in the sha
pe of loans, where the security is unimpeachable
. Wehave done a good deal in this direction duri
ng the last few years, andthere are many noble f
amilies to whom we have advanced large sums upon
the security of their pictures, libraries, or pl
ate.Yesterday morning I was seated in my office 
at the bank when a cardwas brought in to me by o
ne of the clerks. I started when I saw thename, 
for it was that of none other than-well, perhaps
 even to you Ihad better say no more than that i
t was a name which is a householdword all over t
he earth-one of the highest, noblest, most exalt
ed namesin England. I was overwhelmed by the hon
our and attempted, when heentered, to say so, bu
t he plunged at once into business with the airo
f a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a di
sagreeable task.Mr. Holder, said he, I have been
 informed that you are in the habitof advancing 
money.The firm does so when the security is good
. I answered.It is absolutely essential to me, s
aid he, that I should have 50,000 at once. I cou
ld, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten time
sover from my friends, but I much prefer to make
 it a matter of businessand to carry out that bu
siness myself. In my position you can readilyund
erstand that it is unwise to place ones self und
er obligations.For how long, may I ask, do you w
ant this sum I asked.Next Monday I have a large 
sum due to me, and I shall then mostcertainly re
pay what you advance, with whatever interest you
 think itright to charge. But it is very essenti
al to me that the money shouldbe paid at once.I 
should be happy to advance it without further pa
rley from my ownprivate purse, said I, were it n
ot that the strain would be rathermore than it c
ould bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it 
in thename of the firm, then in justice to my pa
rtner I must insist that,even in your case, ever
y businesslike precaution should be taken.I shou
ld much prefer to have it so, said he, raising u
p a square,black morocco case which he had laid 
beside his chair. You havedoubtless heard of the
 Beryl CoronetOne of the most precious public po
ssessions of the empire, said I.Precisely. He op
ened the case, and there, imbedded in soft,flesh
-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of j
ewellery which hehad named. There are thirty-nin
e enormous beryls, said he, and theprice of the 
gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimat
e wouldput the worth of the coronet at double th
e sum which I have asked. I amprepared to leave 
it with you as my security.I took the precious c
ase into my hands and looked in some perplexityf
rom it to my illustrious client.You doubt its va
lue he asked.Not at all. I only doubt-The propri
ety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at r
est aboutthat. I should not dream of doing so we
re it not absolutely certainthat I should be abl
e in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matte
rof form. Is the security sufficientAmple.You un
derstand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a str
ong proof ofthe confidence which I have in you, 
founded upon all that I have heardof you. I rely
 upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain
 from allgossip upon the matter but, above all, 
to preserve this coronet withevery possible prec
aution because I need not say that a great publi
cscandal would be caused if any harm were to bef
all it. Any injury to itwould be almost as serio
us as its complete loss, for there are noberyls 
in the world to match these, and it would be imp
ossible toreplace them. I leave it with you, how
ever, with every confidence, andI shall call for
 it in person on Monday morning.Seeing that my c
lient was anxious to leave, I said no more but,c
alling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over
 fifty  1000 notes.When I was alone once more, h
owever, with the precious case lying uponthe tab
le in front of me, I could not but think with so
me misgivings ofthe immense responsibility which
 it entailed upon me. There could be nodoubt tha
t, as it was a national possession, a horrible s
candal wouldensue if any misfortune should occur
 to it. I already regretted havingever consented
 to take charge of it. However, it was too late 
to alterthe matter now, so I locked it up in my 
private safe and turned oncemore to my work.When
 evening came I felt that it would be an imprude
nce to leave soprecious a thing in the office be
hind me. Bankers safes had beenforced before now
, and why should not mine be If so, how terrible
would be the position in which I should find mys
elf I determined,therefore, that for the next fe
w days I would always carry the casebackward and
 forward with me, so that it might never be real
ly out ofmy reach. With this intention, I called
 a cab and drove out to my houseat Streatham, ca
rrying the jewel with me. I did not breathe free
lyuntil I had taken it upstairs and locked it in
 the bureau of mydressing-room.And now a word as
 to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you tot
horoughly understand the situation. My groom and
 my page sleep out ofthe house, and may be set a
side altogether. I have three maid-servantswho h
ave been with me a number of years and whose abs
olute reliabilityis quite above suspicion. Anoth
er, Lucy Parr, the second waiting-maid,has only 
been in my service a few months. She came with a
n excellentcharacter, however, and has always gi
ven me satisfaction. She is a verypretty girl an
d has attracted admirers who have occasionally h
ung aboutthe place. That is the only drawback wh
ich we have found to her, but webelieve her to b
e a thoroughly good girl in every way.So much fo
r the servants. My family itself is so small tha
t it willnot take me long to describe it. I am a
 widower and have an only son,Arthur. He has bee
n a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes-a grievousd
isappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself 
to blame. People tellme that I have spoiled him.
 Very likely I have. When my dear wife diedI fel
t that he was all I had to love. I could not bea
r to see the smilefade even for a moment from hi
s face. I have never denied him a wish.Perhaps i
t would have been better for both of us had I be
en sterner,but I meant it for the best.It was na
turally my intention that he should succeed me i
n mybusiness, but he was not of a business turn.
 He was wild, wayward, and,to speak the truth, I
 could not trust him in the handling of large su
msof money. When he was young he became a member
 of an aristocratic club,and there, having charm
ing manners, he was soon the intimate of anumber
 of men with long purses and expensive habits. H
e learned to playheavily at cards and to squande
r money on the turf, until he had againand again
 to come to me and implore me to give him an adv
ance upon hisallowance, that he might settle his
 debts of honour. He tried more thanonce to brea
k away from the dangerous company which he was k
eeping, buteach time the influence of his friend
, Sir George Burnwell, was enoughto draw him bac
k again.And, indeed, I could not wonder that suc
h a man as Sir George Burnwellshould gain an inf
luence over him, for he has frequently brought h
im tomy house, and I have found myself that I co
uld hardly resist thefascination of his manner. 
He is older than Arthur, a man of the worldto hi
s finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen
 everything, abrilliant talker, and a man of gre
at personal beauty. Yet when I thinkof him in co
ld blood, far away from the glamour of his prese
nce, I amconvinced from his cynical speech and t
he look which I have caught inhis eyes that he i
s one who should be deeply distrusted. So I thin
k,and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a 
womans quick insightinto character.And now there
 is only she to be described. She is my niece; b
ut whenmy brother died five years ago and left h
er alone in the world Iadopted her, and have loo
ked upon her ever since as my daughter. She isa 
sunbeam in my house-sweet, loving, beautiful, a 
wonderful manager andhousekeeper, yet as tender 
and quiet and gentle as a woman could be.She is 
my right hand. I do not know what I could do wit
hout her. Inonly one matter has she ever gone ag
ainst my wishes. Twice my boy hasasked her to ma
rry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each ti
me shehas refused him. I think that if anyone co
uld have drawn him into theright path it would h
ave been she, and that his marriage might havech
anged his whole life; but now, alas it is too la
te-forever too lateNow, Mr. Holmes, you know the
 people who live under my roof, and Ishall conti
nue with my miserable story.When we were taking 
coffee in the drawing-room that night afterdinne
r, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of 
the precioustreasure which we had under our roof
, suppressing only the name of myclient. Lucy Pa
rr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am sur
e, leftthe room; but I cannot swear that the doo
r was closed. Mary and Arthurwere much intereste
d and wished to see the famous coronet, but Itho
ught it better not to disturb it.Where have you 
put it asked Arthur.In my own bureau.Well, I hop
e to goodness the house wont be burgled during t
henight. said he.It is locked up, I answered.Oh,
 any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a 
youngster I haveopened it myself with the key of
 the box-room cupboard.He often had a wild way o
f talking, so that I thought little of whathe sa
id. He followed me to my room, however, that nig
ht with a verygrave face.Look here, dad, said he
 with his eyes cast down, can you let mehave  20
0No, I cannot I answered sharply. I have been fa
r too generous withyou in money matters.You have
 been very kind, said he, but I must have this m
oney, orelse I can never show my face inside the
 club again.And a very good thing, too I cried.Y
es, but you would not have me leave it a dishono
ured man, said he.I could not bear the disgrace.
 I must raise the money in some way, andif you w
ill not let me have it, then I must try other me
ans.I was very angry, for this was the third dem
and during the month. Youshall not have a farthi
ng from me, I cried, on which he bowed and leftt
he room without another word.When he was gone I 
unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure w
assafe, and locked it again. Then I started to g
o round the house to seethat all was secure-a du
ty which I usually leave to Mary but which Ithou
ght it well to perform myself that night. As I c
ame down the stairsI saw Mary herself at the sid
e window of the hall, which she closed andfasten
ed as I approached.Tell me, dad, said she, looki
ng, I thought, a little disturbed, didyou give L
ucy, the maid, leave to go out to-nightCertainly
 not.She came in just now by the back door. I ha
ve no doubt that she hasonly been to the side ga
te to see someone, but I think that it ishardly 
safe and should be stopped.You must speak to her
 in the morning, or I will if you prefer it. Are
you sure that everything is fastenedQuite sure, 
dad.Then, good-night. I kissed her and went up t
o my bedroom again,where I was soon asleep.I am 
endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes,
 which may haveany bearing upon the case, but I 
beg that you will question me upon anypoint whic
h I do not make clear.On the contrary, your stat
ement is singularly lucid.I come to a part of my
 story now in which I should wish to beparticula
rly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the a
nxiety in mymind tended, no doubt, to make me ev
en less so than usual. About two inthe morning, 
then, I was awakened by some sound in the house.
 It hadceased ere I was wide awake, but it had l
eft an impression behind it asthough a window ha
d gently closed somewhere. I lay listening with 
allmy ears. Suddenly, to my horror, there was a 
distinct sound offootsteps moving softly in the 
next room. I slipped out of bed, allpalpitating 
with fear, and peeped round the corner of my dre
ssing-roomdoor.Arthur I screamed, you villain yo
u thief How dare you touch thatcoronetThe gas wa
s half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy,
 dressedonly in his shirt and trousers, was stan
ding beside the light, holdingthe coronet in his
 hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it, or be
ndingit with all his strength. At my cry he drop
ped it from his grasp andturned as pale as death
. I snatched it up and examined it. One of thego
ld corners, with three of the beryls in it, was 
missing.You blackguard I shouted, beside myself 
with rage. You havedestroyed it You have dishono
ured me forever Where are the jewelswhich you ha
ve stolenStolen he cried.Yes, thief I roared, sh
aking him by the shoulder.There are none missing
. There cannot be any missing, said he.There are
 three missing. And you know where they are. Mus
t I call youa liar as well as a thief Did I not 
see you trying to tear off anotherpieceYou have 
called me names enough, said he, I will not stan
d it anylonger. I shall not say another word abo
ut this business, since youhave chosen to insult
 me. I will leave your house in the morning andm
ake my own way in the world.You shall leave it i
n the hands of the police I cried half-mad withg
rief and rage. I shall have this matter probed t
o the bottom.You shall learn nothing from me, sa
id he with a passion such as Ishould not have th
ought was in his nature. If you choose to call t
hepolice, let the police find what they can.By t
his time the whole house was astir, for I had ra
ised my voice inmy anger. Mary was the first to 
rush into my room, and, at the sight ofthe coron
et and of Arthurs face, she read the whole story
 and, with ascream, fell down senseless on the g
round. I sent the housemaid for thepolice and pu
t the investigation into their hands at once. Wh
en theinspector and a constable entered the hous
e, Arthur, who had stoodsullenly with his arms f
olded, asked me whether it was my intention toch
arge him with theft. I answered that it had ceas
ed to be a privatematter, but had become a publi
c one, since the ruined coronet wasnational prop
erty. I was determined that the law should have 
its way ineverything.At least, said he, you will
 not have me arrested at once. It wouldbe to you
r advantage as well as mine if I might leave the
 house forfive minutes.That you may get away, or
 perhaps that you may conceal what you havestole
n, said I. And then, realising the dreadful posi
tion in which Iwas placed, I implored him to rem
ember that not only my honour but thatof one who
 was far greater than I was at stake; and that h
e threatenedto raise a scandal which would convu
lse the nation. He might avert itall if he would
 but tell me what he had done with the three mis
singstones.You may as well face the matter, said
 I; you have been caught inthe act, and no confe
ssion could make your guilt more heinous. If you
but make such reparation as is in your power, by
 telling us where theberyls are, all shall be fo
rgiven and forgotten.Keep your forgiveness for t
hose who ask for it, he answered, turningaway fr
om me with a sneer. I saw that he was too harden
ed for any wordsof mine to influence him. There 
was but one way for it. I called in theinspector
 and gave him into custody. A search was made at
 once not onlyof his person but of his room and 
of every portion of the house wherehe could poss
ibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of th
em couldbe found, nor would the wretched boy ope
n his mouth for all ourpersuasions and our threa
ts. This morning he was removed to a cell, andI,
 after going through all the police formalities,
 have hurried roundto you to implore you to use 
your skill in unravelling the matter. Thepolice 
have openly confessed that they can at present m
ake nothing ofit. You may go to any expense whic
h you think necessary. I have alreadyoffered a r
eward of  1000. My God, what shall I do I have l
ost myhonour, my gems, and my son in one night. 
Oh, what shall I doHe put a hand on either side 
of his head and rocked himself to and fro,dronin
g to himself like a child whose grief has got be
yond words.Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some f
ew minutes, with his brows knittedand his eyes f
ixed upon the fire.Do you receive much company h
e asked.None save my partner with his family and
 an occasional friend ofArthurs. Sir George Burn
well has been several times lately. No oneelse, 
I think.Do you go out much in societyArthur does
. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care
 for it.That is unusual in a young girl.She is o
f a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very yo
ung. She isfour-and-twenty.This matter, from wha
t you say, seems to have been a shock to heralso
.Terrible She is even more affected than I.You h
ave neither of you any doubt as to your sons gui
ltHow can we have when I saw him with my own eye
s with the coronet inhis hands.I hardly consider
 that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of t
hecoronet at all injuredYes, it was twisted.Do y
ou not think, then, that he might have been tryi
ng to straightenitGod bless you You are doing wh
at you can for him and for me. But itis too heav
y a task. What was he doing there at all If his 
purposewere innocent, why did he not say soPreci
sely. And if it were guilty, why did he not inve
nt a lie Hissilence appears to me to cut both wa
ys. There are several singularpoints about the c
ase. What did the police think of the noise whic
hawoke you from your sleepThey considered that i
t might be caused by Arthurs closing hisbedroom 
door.A likely story As if a man bent on felony w
ould slam his door so asto wake a household. Wha
t did they say, then, of the disappearance ofthe
se gemsThey are still sounding the planking and 
probing the furniture in thehope of finding them
.Have they thought of looking outside the houseY
es, they have shown extraordinary energy. The wh
ole garden hasalready been minutely examined.Now
, my dear sir, said Holmes, is it not obvious to
 you now thatthis matter really strikes very muc
h deeper than either you or thepolice were at fi
rst inclined to think It appeared to you to be a
simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex.
 Consider what isinvolved by your theory. You su
ppose that your son came down from hisbed, went,
 at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened yo
ur bureau,took out your coronet, broke off by ma
in force a small portion of it,went off to some 
other place, concealed three gems out of thethir
ty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find th
em, and thenreturned with the other thirty-six i
nto the room in which he exposedhimself to the g
reatest danger of being discovered. I ask you no
w, issuch a theory tenableBut what other is ther
e cried the banker with a gesture of despair.If 
his motives were innocent, why does he not expla
in themIt is our task to find that out, replied 
Holmes; so now, if youplease, Mr. Holder, we wil
l set off for Streatham together, and devotean h
our to glancing a little more closely into detai
ls.My friend insisted upon my accompanying them 
in their expedition, whichI was eager enough to 
do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeplysti
rred by the story to which we had listened. I co
nfess that the guiltof the bankers son appeared 
to me to be as obvious as it did to hisunhappy f
ather, but still I had such faith in Holmes judg
ment that Ifelt that there must be some grounds 
for hope as long as he wasdissatisfied with the 
accepted explanation. He hardly spoke a word the
whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat wi
th his chin upon hisbreast and his hat drawn ove
r his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought.Our clie
nt appeared to have taken fresh heart at the lit
tle glimpse ofhope which had been presented to h
im, and he even broke into adesultory chat with 
me over his business affairs. A short railwayjou
rney and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, 
the modest residenceof the great financier.Fairb
ank was a good-sized square house of white stone
, standing back alittle from the road. A double 
carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn,stretched 
down in front to two large iron gates which clos
ed theentrance. On the right side was a small wo
oden thicket, which led intoa narrow path betwee
n two neat hedges stretching from the road to th
ekitchen door, and forming the tradesmens entran
ce. On the left ran alane which led to the stabl
es, and was not itself within the grounds atall,
 being a public, though little used, thoroughfar
e. Holmes left usstanding at the door and walked
 slowly all round the house, across thefront, do
wn the tradesmens path, and so round by the gard
en behindinto the stable lane. So long was he th
at Mr. Holder and I went intothe dining-room and
 waited by the fire until he should return. We w
eresitting there in silence when the door opened
 and a young lady came in.She was rather above t
he middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes,
which seemed the darker against the absolute pal
lor of her skin. I donot think that I have ever 
seen such deadly paleness in a womans face.Her l
ips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flus
hed with crying.As she swept silently into the r
oom she impressed me with a greatersense of grie
f than the banker had done in the morning, and i
t was themore striking in her as she was evident
ly a woman of strong character,with immense capa
city for self-restraint. Disregarding my presenc
e, shewent straight to her uncle and passed her 
hand over his head with asweet womanly caress.Yo
u have given orders that Arthur should be libera
ted, have you not,dad she asked.No, no, my girl,
 the matter must be probed to the bottom.But I a
m so sure that he is innocent. You know what wom
ans instinctsare. I know that he has done no har
m and that you will be sorry forhaving acted so 
harshly.Why is he silent, then, if he is innocen
tWho knows Perhaps because he was so angry that 
you should suspecthim.How could I help suspectin
g him, when I actually saw him with thecoronet i
n his handOh, but he had only picked it up to lo
ok at it. Oh, do, do take myword for it that he 
is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more
.It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur i
n prisonI shall never let it drop until the gems
 are found-never, Mary Youraffection for Arthur 
blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. F
arfrom hushing the thing up, I have brought a ge
ntleman down from Londonto inquire more deeply i
nto it.This gentleman she asked, facing round to
 me.No, his friend. He wished us to leave him al
one. He is round in thestable lane now.The stabl
e lane She raised her dark eyebrows. What can he
 hope tofind there Ah this, I suppose, is he. I 
trust, sir, that you willsucceed in proving, wha
t I feel sure is the truth, that my cousinArthur
 is innocent of this crime.I fully share your op
inion, and I trust, with you, that we may provei
t, returned Holmes, going back to the mat to kno
ck the snow from hisshoes. I believe I have the 
honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder.Might I as
k you a question or twoPray do, sir, if it may h
elp to clear this horrible affair up.You heard n
othing yourself last nightNothing, until my uncl
e here began to speak loudly. I heard that, andI
 came down.You shut up the windows and doors the
 night before. Did you fasten allthe windowsYes.
Were they all fastened this morningYes.You have 
a maid who has a sweetheart I think that you rem
arked toyour uncle last night that she had been 
out to see himYes, and she was the girl who wait
ed in the drawing-room, and who mayhave heard un
cles remarks about the coronet.I see. You infer 
that she may have gone out to tell her sweethear
t,and that the two may have planned the robbery.
But what is the good of all these vague theories
, cried the bankerimpatiently, when I have told 
you that I saw Arthur with the coronetin his han
dsWait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back t
o that. About this girl,Miss Holder. You saw her
 return by the kitchen door, I presumeYes; when 
I went to see if the door was fastened for the n
ight I mether slipping in. I saw the man, too, i
n the gloom.Do you know himOh, yes he is the gre
engrocer who brings our vegetables round. Hisnam
e is Francis Prosper.He stood, said Holmes, to t
he left of the door-that is to say,farther up th
e path than is necessary to reach the doorYes, h
e did.And he is a man with a wooden legSomething
 like fear sprang up in the young ladys expressi
ve blackeyes. Why, you are like a magician, said
 she. How do you know thatShe smiled, but there 
was no answering smile in Holmes thin, eagerface
.I should be very glad now to go upstairs, said 
he. I shall probablywish to go over the outside 
of the house again. Perhaps I had bettertake a l
ook at the lower windows before I go up.He walke
d swiftly round from one to the other, pausing o
nly at thelarge one which looked from the hall o
nto the stable lane. This heopened and made a ve
ry careful examination of the sill with hispower
ful magnifying lens. Now we shall go upstairs, s
aid he at last.The bankers dressing-room was a p
lainly furnished little chamber, witha grey carp
et, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes we
nt to thebureau first and looked hard at the loc
k.Which key was used to open it he asked.That wh
ich my son himself indicated-that of the cupboar
d of thelumber-room.Have you it hereThat is it o
n the dressing-table.Sherlock Holmes took it up 
and opened the bureau.It is a noiseless lock, sa
id he. It is no wonder that it did notwake you. 
This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We m
ust have alook at it. He opened the case, and ta
king out the diadem he laid itupon the table. It
 was a magnificent specimen of the jewellers art
,and the thirty-six stones were the finest that 
I have ever seen. At oneside of the coronet was 
a cracked edge, where a corner holding threegems
 had been torn away.Now, Mr. Holder, said Holmes
, here is the corner which correspondsto that wh
ich has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg 
that you willbreak it off.The banker recoiled in
 horror. I should not dream of trying, said he.T
hen I will. Holmes suddenly bent his strength up
on it, but withoutresult. I feel it give a littl
e, said he; but, though I amexceptionally strong
 in the fingers, it would take me all my time to
break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, 
what do you think wouldhappen if I did break it,
 Mr. Holder There would be a noise like apistol 
shot. Do you tell me that all this happened with
in a few yardsof your bed and that you heard not
hing of itI do not know what to think. It is all
 dark to me.But perhaps it may grow lighter as w
e go. What do you think, MissHolderI confess tha
t I still share my uncles perplexity.Your son ha
d no shoes or slippers on when you saw himHe had
 nothing on save only his trousers and shirt.Tha
nk you. We have certainly been favoured with ext
raordinary luckduring this inquiry, and it will 
be entirely our own fault if we do notsucceed in
 clearing the matter up. With your permission, M
r. Holder, Ishall now continue my investigations
 outside.He went alone, at his own request, for 
he explained that anyunnecessary footmarks might
 make his task more difficult. For an houror mor
e he was at work, returning at last with his fee
t heavy with snowand his features as inscrutable
 as ever.I think that I have seen now all that t
here is to see, Mr. Holder,said he; I can serve 
you best by returning to my rooms.But the gems, 
Mr. Holmes. Where are theyI cannot tell.The bank
er wrung his hands. I shall never see them again
 he cried.And my son You give me hopesMy opinion
 is in no way altered.Then, for Gods sake, what 
was this dark business which was acted inmy hous
e last nightIf you can call upon me at my Baker 
Street rooms to-morrow morningbetween nine and t
en I shall be happy to do what I can to make itc
learer. I understand that you give me carte blan
che to act for you,provided only that I get back
 the gems, and that you place no limit onthe sum
 I may draw.I would give my fortune to have them
 back.Very good. I shall look into the matter be
tween this and then.Good-bye; it is just possibl
e that I may have to come over here againbefore 
evening.It was obvious to me that my companions 
mind was now made up about thecase, although wha
t his conclusions were was more than I could eve
ndimly imagine. Several times during our homewar
d journey I endeavouredto sound him upon the poi
nt, but he always glided away to some othertopic
, until at last I gave it over in despair. It wa
s not yet threewhen we found ourselves in our ro
oms once more. He hurried to hischamber and was 
down again in a few minutes dressed as a common 
loafer.With his collar turned up, his shiny, see
dy coat, his red cravat, andhis worn boots, he w
as a perfect sample of the class.I think that th
is should do, said he, glancing into the glass a
bovethe fireplace. I only wish that you could co
me with me, Watson, but Ifear that it wont do. I
 may be on the trail in this matter, or I maybe 
following a will-o-the-wisp, but I shall soon kn
ow which it is. Ihope that I may be back in a fe
w hours. He cut a slice of beef fromthe joint up
on the sideboard, sandwiched it between two roun
ds ofbread, and thrusting this rude meal into hi
s pocket he started off uponhis expedition.I had
 just finished my tea when he returned, evidentl
y in excellentspirits, swinging an old elastic-s
ided boot in his hand. He chucked itdown into a 
corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.I only
 looked in as I passed, said he. I am going righ
t on.Where toOh, to the other side of the West E
nd. It may be some time before Iget back. Dont w
ait up for me in case I should be late.How are y
ou getting onOh, so so. Nothing to complain of. 
I have been out to Streatham sinceI saw you last
, but I did not call at the house. It is a very 
sweetlittle problem, and I would not have missed
 it for a good deal.However, I must not sit goss
iping here, but must get these disreputablecloth
es off and return to my highly respectable self.
I could see by his manner that he had stronger r
easons for satisfactionthan his words alone woul
d imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was evena 
touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He haste
ned upstairs, and afew minutes later I heard the
 slam of the hall door, which told me thathe was
 off once more upon his congenial hunt.I waited 
until midnight, but there was no sign of his ret
urn, so Iretired to my room. It was no uncommon 
thing for him to be away fordays and nights on e
nd when he was hot upon a scent, so that hislate
ness caused me no surprise. I do not know at wha
t hour he came in,but when I came down to breakf
ast in the morning there he was with acup of cof
fee in one hand and the paper in the other, as f
resh and trimas possible.You will excuse my begi
nning without you, Watson, said he, but youremem
ber that our client has rather an early appointm
ent this morning.Why, it is after nine now, I an
swered. I should not be surprised ifthat were he
. I thought I heard a ring.It was, indeed, our f
riend the financier. I was shocked by the change
which had come over him, for his face which was 
naturally of a broadand massive mould, was now p
inched and fallen in, while his hair seemedto me
 at least a shade whiter. He entered with a wear
iness and lethargywhich was even more painful th
an his violence of the morning before,and he dro
pped heavily into the armchair which I pushed fo
rward forhim.I do not know what I have done to b
e so severely tried, said he.Only two days ago I
 was a happy and prosperous man, without a care 
inthe world. Now I am left to a lonely and disho
noured age. One sorrowcomes close upon the heels
 of another. My niece, Mary, has desertedme.Dese
rted youYes. Her bed this morning had not been s
lept in, her room was empty,and a note for me la
y upon the hall table. I had said to her lastnig
ht, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had 
married my boy allmight have been well with him.
 Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to sayso. It i
s to that remark that she refers in this note   
 MY DEAREST UNCLE,-I feel that I have brought tr
ouble upon you,    and that if I had acted diffe
rently this terrible misfortune might    never h
ave occurred. I cannot, with this thought in my 
mind, ever    again be happy under your roof, an
d I feel that I must leave you    forever. Do no
t worry about my future, for that is provided fo
r;    and, above all, do not search for me, for 
it will be fruitless    labour and an ill-servic
e to me. In life or in death, I am ever    your 
loving,    MARY.What could she mean by that note
, Mr. Holmes Do you think it pointsto suicideNo,
 no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best
 possible solution.I trust, Mr. Holder, that you
 are nearing the end of your troubles.Ha You say
 so You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you ha
ve learnedsomething Where are the gemsYou would 
not think  1000 apiece an excessive sum for them
I would pay ten.That would be unnecessary. Three
 thousand will cover the matter. Andthere is a l
ittle reward, I fancy. Have you your cheque-book
 Here is apen. Better make it out for  4000.With
 a dazed face the banker made out the required c
heck. Holmes walkedover to his desk, took out a 
little triangular piece of gold with threegems i
n it, and threw it down upon the table.With a sh
riek of joy our client clutched it up.You have i
t he gasped. I am saved I am savedThe reaction o
f joy was as passionate as his grief had been, a
nd hehugged his recovered gems to his bosom.Ther
e is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder, said S
herlock Holmesrather sternly.Owe He caught up a 
pen. Name the sum, and I will pay it.No, the deb
t is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to
 that noblelad, your son, who has carried himsel
f in this matter as I should beproud to see my o
wn son do, should I ever chance to have one.Then
 it was not Arthur who took themI told you yeste
rday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not.You a
re sure of it Then let us hurry to him at once t
o let him knowthat the truth is known.He knows i
t already. When I had cleared it all up I had an
 interviewwith him, and finding that he would no
t tell me the story, I told it tohim, on which h
e had to confess that I was right and to add the
 veryfew details which were not yet quite clear 
to me. Your news of thismorning, however, may op
en his lips.For Heavens sake, tell me, then, wha
t is this extraordinary mysteryI will do so, and
 I will show you the steps by which I reached it
. Andlet me say to you, first, that which it is 
hardest for me to say andfor you to hear there h
as been an understanding between Sir GeorgeBurnw
ell and your niece Mary. They have now fled toge
ther.My Mary ImpossibleIt is unfortunately more 
than possible; it is certain. Neither you noryou
r son knew the true character of this man when y
ou admitted him intoyour family circle. He is on
e of the most dangerous men in England-aruined g
ambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man w
ithout heart orconscience. Your niece knew nothi
ng of such men. When he breathed hisvows to her,
 as he had done to a hundred before her, she fla
tteredherself that she alone had touched his hea
rt. The devil knows best whathe said, but at lea
st she became his tool and was in the habit ofse
eing him nearly every evening.I cannot, and I wi
ll not, believe it cried the banker with an ashe
nface.I will tell you, then, what occurred in yo
ur house last night. Yourniece, when you had, as
 she thought, gone to your room, slipped downand
 talked to her lover through the window which le
ads into the stablelane. His footmarks had press
ed right through the snow, so long had hestood t
here. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lu
st for goldkindled at the news, and he bent her 
to his will. I have no doubt thatshe loved you, 
but there are women in whom the love of a lovere
xtinguishes all other loves, and I think that sh
e must have been one.She had hardly listened to 
his instructions when she saw you comingdownstai
rs, on which she closed the window rapidly and t
old you aboutone of the servants escapade with h
er wooden-legged lover, which wasall perfectly t
rue.Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his inte
rview with you but heslept badly on account of h
is uneasiness about his club debts. In themiddle
 of the night he heard a soft tread pass his doo
r, so he roseand, looking out, was surprised to 
see his cousin walking verystealthily along the 
passage until she disappeared into yourdressing-
room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipp
ed on someclothes and waited there in the dark t
o see what would come of thisstrange affair. Pre
sently she emerged from the room again, and in t
helight of the passage-lamp your son saw that sh
e carried the preciouscoronet in her hands. She 
passed down the stairs, and he, thrillingwith ho
rror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain n
ear your door,whence he could see what passed in
 the hall beneath. He saw herstealthily open the
 window, hand out the coronet to someone in theg
loom, and then closing it once more hurry back t
o her room, passingquite close to where he stood
 hid behind the curtain.As long as she was on th
e scene he could not take any action without aho
rrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But 
the instant that shewas gone he realised how cru
shing a misfortune this would be for you,and how
 all-important it was to set it right. He rushed
 down, just ashe was, in his bare feet, opened t
he window, sprang out into the snow,and ran down
 the lane, where he could see a dark figure in t
hemoonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get aw
ay, but Arthur caughthim, and there was a strugg
le between them, your lad tugging at oneside of 
the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In t
he scuffle,your son struck Sir George and cut hi
m over the eye. Then somethingsuddenly snapped, 
and your son, finding that he had the coronet in
 hishands, rushed back, closed the window, ascen
ded to your room, and hadjust observed that the 
coronet had been twisted in the struggle and was
endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared 
upon the scene.Is it possible gasped the banker.
You then roused his anger by calling him names a
t a moment when hefelt that he had deserved your
 warmest thanks. He could not explain thetrue st
ate of affairs without betraying one who certain
ly deservedlittle enough consideration at his ha
nds. He took the more chivalrousview, however, a
nd preserved her secret.And that was why she shr
ieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,cried
 Mr. Holder. Oh, my God what a blind fool I have
 been And hisasking to be allowed to go out for 
five minutes The dear fellow wantedto see if the
 missing piece were at the scene of the struggle
. Howcruelly I have misjudged himWhen I arrived 
at the house, continued Holmes, I at once went v
erycarefully round it to observe if there were a
ny traces in the snowwhich might help me. I knew
 that none had fallen since the eveningbefore, a
nd also that there had been a strong frost to pr
eserveimpressions. I passed along the tradesmens
 path, but found it alltrampled down and indisti
nguishable. Just beyond it, however, at thefar s
ide of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and t
alked with a man,whose round impressions on one 
side showed that he had a wooden leg. Icould eve
n tell that they had been disturbed, for the wom
an had runback swiftly to the door, as was shown
 by the deep toe and light heelmarks, while Wood
en-leg had waited a little, and then had gone aw
ay. Ithought at the time that this might be the 
maid and her sweetheart, ofwhom you had already 
spoken to me, and inquiry showed it was so. Ipas
sed round the garden without seeing anything mor
e than randomtracks, which I took to be the poli
ce; but when I got into the stablelane a very lo
ng and complex story was written in the snow in 
front ofme.There was a double line of tracks of 
a booted man, and a second doubleline which I sa
w with delight belonged to a man with naked feet
. I wasat once convinced from what you had told 
me that the latter was yourson. The first had wa
lked both ways, but the other had run swiftly, a
ndas his tread was marked in places over the dep
ression of the boot, itwas obvious that he had p
assed after the other. I followed them up andfou
nd they led to the hall window, where Boots had 
worn all the snowaway while waiting. Then I walk
ed to the other end, which was a hundredyards or
 more down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced
 round, wherethe snow was cut up as though there
 had been a struggle, and, finally,where a few d
rops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was 
notmistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, a
nd another little smudgeof blood showed that it 
was he who had been hurt. When he came to thehig
h road at the other end, I found that the paveme
nt had been cleared,so there was an end to that 
clue.On entering the house, however, I examined,
 as you remember, the silland framework of the h
all window with my lens, and I could at once see
that someone had passed out. I could distinguish
 the outline of aninstep where the wet foot had 
been placed in coming in. I was thenbeginning to
 be able to form an opinion as to what had occur
red. A manhad waited outside the window; someone
 had brought the gems; the deedhad been overseen
 by your son; he had pursued the thief; had stru
ggledwith him; they had each tugged at the coron
et, their united strengthcausing injuries which 
neither alone could have effected. He hadreturne
d with the prize, but had left a fragment in the
 grasp of hisopponent. So far I was clear. The q
uestion now was, who was the man, andwho was it 
brought him the coronetIt is an old maxim of min
e that when you have excluded the impossible,wha
tever remains, however improbable, must be the t
ruth. Now, I knewthat it was not you who had bro
ught it down, so there only remainedyour niece a
nd the maids. But if it were the maids, why shou
ld your sonallow himself to be accused in their 
place There could be no possiblereason. As he lo
ved his cousin, however, there was an excellente
xplanation why he should retain her secret-the m
ore so as the secretwas a disgraceful one. When 
I remembered that you had seen her at thatwindow
, and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet 
again, myconjecture became a certainty.And who c
ould it be who was her confederate A lover evide
ntly, forwho else could outweigh the love and gr
atitude which she must feel toyou I knew that yo
u went out little, and that your circle of frien
dswas a very limited one. But among them was Sir
 George Burnwell. I hadheard of him before as be
ing a man of evil reputation among women. Itmust
 have been he who wore those boots and retained 
the missing gems.Even though he knew that Arthur
 had discovered him, he might stillflatter himse
lf that he was safe, for the lad could not say a
 wordwithout compromising his own family.Well, y
our own good sense will suggest what measures I 
took next. Iwent in the shape of a loafer to Sir
 Georges house, managed to pick upan acquaintanc
e with his valet, learned that his master had cu
t hishead the night before, and, finally, at the
 expense of six shillings,made all sure by buyin
g a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these Ijour
neyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactl
y fitted thetracks.I saw an ill-dressed vagabond
 in the lane yesterday evening, said Mr.Holder.P
recisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, s
o I came home andchanged my clothes. It was a de
licate part which I had to play then,for I saw t
hat a prosecution must be avoided to avert scand
al, and Iknew that so astute a villain would see
 that our hands were tied in thematter. I went a
nd saw him. At first, of course, he denied every
thing.But when I gave him every particular that 
had occurred, he tried tobluster and took down a
 life-preserver from the wall. I knew my man,how
ever, and I clapped a pistol to his head before 
he could strike.Then he became a little more rea
sonable. I told him that we would givehim a pric
e for the stones he held- 1000 apiece. That brou
ght out thefirst signs of grief that he had show
n. Why, dash it all said he,Ive let them go at s
ix hundred for the three I soon managed to getth
e address of the receiver who had them, on promi
sing him that therewould be no prosecution. Off 
I set to him, and after much chaffering Igot our
 stones at  1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon y
our son, toldhim that all was right, and eventua
lly got to my bed about two oclock,after what I 
may call a really hard days work.A day which has
 saved England from a great public scandal, said
 thebanker, rising. Sir, I cannot find words to 
thank you, but you shallnot find me ungrateful f
or what you have done. Your skill has indeedexce
eded all that I have heard of it. And now I must
 fly to my dear boyto apologise to him for the w
rong which I have done him. As to what youtell m
e of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not ev
en your skill caninform me where she is now.I th
ink that we may safely say, returned Holmes, tha
t she iswherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is e
qually certain, too, thatwhatever her sins are, 
they will soon receive a more than sufficientpun
ishment.XII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES
To the man who loves art for its own sake, remar
ked Sherlock Holmes,tossing aside the advertisem
ent sheet of The Daily Telegraph, it isfrequentl
y in its least important and lowliest manifestat
ions that thekeenest pleasure is to be derived. 
It is pleasant to me to observe,Watson, that you
 have so far grasped this truth that in these li
ttlerecords of our cases which you have been goo
d enough to draw up, and, Iam bound to say, occa
sionally to embellish, you have given prominence
not so much to the many causes clbres and sensat
ional trials inwhich I have figured but rather t
o those incidents which may have beentrivial in 
themselves, but which have given room for those 
faculties ofdeduction and of logical synthesis w
hich I have made my specialprovince.And yet, sai
d I, smiling, I cannot quite hold myself absolve
d fromthe charge of sensationalism which has bee
n urged against my records.You have erred, perha
ps, he observed, taking up a glowing cinder with
the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-w
ood pipe which was wontto replace his clay when 
he was in a disputatious rather than ameditative
 mood-you have erred perhaps in attempting to pu
t colour andlife into each of your statements in
stead of confining yourself to thetask of placin
g upon record that severe reasoning from cause t
o effectwhich is really the only notable feature
 about the thing.It seems to me that I have done
 you full justice in the matter, Iremarked with 
some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism
 which Ihad more than once observed to be a stro
ng factor in my friendssingular character.No, it
 is not selfishness or conceit, said he, answeri
ng, as was hiswont, my thoughts rather than my w
ords. If I claim full justice for myart, it is b
ecause it is an impersonal thing-a thing beyond 
myself.Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore
 it is upon the logic ratherthan upon the crime 
that you should dwell. You have degraded whatsho
uld have been a course of lectures into a series
 of tales.It was a cold morning of the early spr
ing, and we sat after breakfaston either side of
 a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. 
Athick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-
coloured houses, and theopposing windows loomed 
like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavyyell
ow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the whi
te cloth andglimmer of china and metal, for the 
table had not been cleared yet.Sherlock Holmes h
ad been silent all the morning, dipping continuo
uslyinto the advertisement columns of a successi
on of papers until at last,having apparently giv
en up his search, he had emerged in no very swee
ttemper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomi
ngs.At the same time, he remarked after a pause,
 during which he had satpuffing at his long pipe
 and gazing down into the fire, you can hardlybe
 open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of 
these cases which youhave been so kind as to int
erest yourself in, a fair proportion do nottreat
 of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small
 matter in which Iendeavoured to help the King o
f Bohemia, the singular experience ofMiss Mary S
utherland, the problem connected with the man wi
th thetwisted lip, and the incident of the noble
 bachelor, were all matterswhich are outside the
 pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensationa
l,I fear that you may have bordered on the trivi
al.The end may have been so, I answered, but the
 methods I hold to havebeen novel and of interes
t.Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the
 great unobservantpublic, who could hardly tell 
a weaver by his tooth or a compositor byhis left
 thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis 
and deductionBut, indeed, if you are trivial, I 
cannot blame you, for the days ofthe great cases
 are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lo
st allenterprise and originality. As to my own l
ittle practice, it seems tobe degenerating into 
an agency for recovering lost lead pencils andgi
ving advice to young ladies from boarding-school
s. I think that Ihave touched bottom at last, ho
wever. This note I had this morningmarks my zero
-point, I fancy. Read it He tossed a crumpled le
tteracross to me.It was dated from Montague Plac
e upon the preceding evening, and ranthus    DEA
R MR. HOLMES,-I am very anxious to consult you a
s to whether I    should or should not accept a 
situation which has been offered to    me as gov
erness. I shall call at half-past ten to-morrow 
if I do    not inconvenience you. Yours faithful
ly,    VIOLET HUNTER.Do you know the young lady 
I asked.Not I.It is half-past ten now.Yes, and I
 have no doubt that is her ring.It may turn out 
to be of more interest than you think. You remem
berthat the affair of the blue carbuncle, which 
appeared to be a mere whimat first, developed in
to a serious investigation. It may be so in this
case, also.Well, let us hope so. But our doubts 
will very soon be solved, forhere, unless I am m
uch mistaken, is the person in question.As he sp
oke the door opened and a young lady entered the
 room. She wasplainly but neatly dressed, with a
 bright, quick face, freckled like aplovers egg,
 and with the brisk manner of a woman who has ha
d her ownway to make in the world.You will excus
e my troubling you, I am sure, said she, as myco
mpanion rose to greet her, but I have had a very
 strange experience,and as I have no parents or 
relations of any sort from whom I could askadvic
e, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enou
gh to tell me whatI should do.Pray take a seat, 
Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything tha
t Ican to serve you.I could see that Holmes was 
favourably impressed by the manner andspeech of 
his new client. He looked her over in his search
ing fashion,and then composed himself, with his 
lids drooping and his finger-tipstogether, to li
sten to her story.I have been a governess for fi
ve years, said she, in the family ofColonel Spen
ce Munro, but two months ago the colonel receive
d anappointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and 
took his children over toAmerica with him, so th
at I found myself without a situation. Iadvertis
ed, and I answered advertisements, but without s
uccess. At lastthe little money which I had save
d began to run short, and I was at mywits end as
 to what I should do.There is a well-known agenc
y for governesses in the West End calledWestaway
s, and there I used to call about once a week in
 order to seewhether anything had turned up whic
h might suit me. Westaway was thename of the fou
nder of the business, but it is really managed b
y MissStoper. She sits in her own little office,
 and the ladies who areseeking employment wait i
n an anteroom, and are then shown in one byone, 
when she consults her ledgers and sees whether s
he has anythingwhich would suit them.Well, when 
I called last week I was shown into the little o
ffice asusual, but I found that Miss Stoper was 
not alone. A prodigiously stoutman with a very s
miling face and a great heavy chin which rolled 
downin fold upon fold over his throat sat at her
 elbow with a pair ofglasses on his nose, lookin
g very earnestly at the ladies who entered.As I 
came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and tu
rned quickly toMiss Stoper.That will do, said he
; I could not ask for anything better.Capital ca
pital He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed hi
s handstogether in the most genial fashion. He w
as such a comfortable-lookingman that it was qui
te a pleasure to look at him.You are looking for
 a situation, miss he asked.Yes, sir.As governes
sYes, sir.And what salary do you askI had  4 a m
onth in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.
Oh, tut, tut sweating-rank sweating he cried, th
rowing his fathands out into the air like a man 
who is in a boiling passion. Howcould anyone off
er so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attracti
ons andaccomplishmentsMy accomplishments, sir, m
ay be less than you imagine, said I. Alittle Fre
nch, a little German, music, and drawing-Tut, tu
t he cried. This is all quite beside the questio
n. Thepoint is, have you or have you not the bea
ring and deportment of alady There it is in a nu
tshell. If you have not, you are not fittedfor t
he rearing of a child who may some day play a co
nsiderable part inthe history of the country. Bu
t if you have, why, then, how could anygentleman
 ask you to condescend to accept anything under 
the threefigures Your salary with me, madam, wou
ld commence at  100 a year.You may imagine, Mr. 
Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such ano
ffer seemed almost too good to be true. The gent
leman, however, seeingperhaps the look of incred
ulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book andtook
 out a note.It is also my custom, said he, smili
ng in the most pleasant fashionuntil his eyes we
re just two little shining slits amid the whitec
reases of his face, to advance to my young ladie
s half their salarybeforehand, so that they may 
meet any little expenses of their journeyand the
ir wardrobe.It seemed to me that I had never met
 so fascinating and so thoughtfula man. As I was
 already in debt to my tradesmen, the advance wa
s agreat convenience, and yet there was somethin
g unnatural about thewhole transaction which mad
e me wish to know a little more before Iquite co
mmitted myself.May I ask where you live, sir sai
d I.Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper 
Beeches, five miles onthe far side of Winchester
. It is the most lovely country, my dearyoung la
dy, and the dearest old country-house.And my dut
ies, sir I should be glad to know what they woul
d be.One child-one dear little romper just six y
ears old. Oh, if you couldsee him killing cockro
aches with a slipper Smack smack smack Threegone
 before you could wink He leaned back in his cha
ir and laughedhis eyes into his head again.I was
 a little startled at the nature of the childs a
musement, butthe fathers laughter made me think 
that perhaps he was joking.My sole duties, then,
 I asked, are to take charge of a singlechildNo,
 no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young l
ady, he cried.Your duty would be, as I am sure y
our good sense would suggest, toobey any little 
commands my wife might give, provided always tha
t theywere such commands as a lady might with pr
opriety obey. You see nodifficulty, hehI should 
be happy to make myself useful.Quite so. In dres
s now, for example. We are faddy people, youknow
-faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to we
ar any dress whichwe might give you, you would n
ot object to our little whim. HehNo, said I, con
siderably astonished at his words.Or to sit here
, or sit there, that would not be offensive to y
ouOh, no.Or to cut your hair quite short before 
you come to usI could hardly believe my ears. As
 you may observe, Mr. Holmes, myhair is somewhat
 luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of che
stnut.It has been considered artistic. I could n
ot dream of sacrificing it inthis offhand fashio
n.I am afraid that that is quite impossible, sai
d I. He had beenwatching me eagerly out of his s
mall eyes, and I could see a shadowpass over his
 face as I spoke.I am afraid that it is quite es
sential, said he. It is a littlefancy of my wife
s, and ladies fancies, you know, madam, ladiesfa
ncies must be consulted. And so you wont cut you
r hairNo, sir, I really could not, I answered fi
rmly.Ah, very well; then that quite settles the 
matter. It is a pity,because in other respects y
ou would really have done very nicely. Inthat ca
se, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more o
f your youngladies.The manageress had sat all th
is while busy with her papers without aword to e
ither of us, but she glanced at me now with so m
uch annoyanceupon her face that I could not help
 suspecting that she had lost ahandsome commissi
on through my refusal.Do you desire your name to
 be kept upon the books she asked.If you please,
 Miss Stoper.Well, really, it seems rather usele
ss, since you refuse the mostexcellent offers in
 this fashion, said she sharply. You can hardlye
xpect us to exert ourselves to find another such
 opening for you.Good-day to you, Miss Hunter. S
he struck a gong upon the table, and Iwas shown 
out by the page.Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got bac
k to my lodgings and found littleenough in the c
upboard, and two or three bills upon the table, 
I beganto ask myself whether I had not done a ve
ry foolish thing. After all,if these people had 
strange fads and expected obedience on the moste
xtraordinary matters, they were at least ready t
o pay for theireccentricity. Very few governesse
s in England are getting  100 a year.Besides, wh
at use was my hair to me Many people are improve
d bywearing it short and perhaps I should be amo
ng the number. Next day Iwas inclined to think t
hat I had made a mistake, and by the day after I
was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride s
o far as to go back tothe agency and inquire whe
ther the place was still open when I receivedthi
s letter from the gentleman himself. I have it h
ere and I will readit to youThe Copper Beeches, 
near Winchester.    DEAR MISS HUNTER,-Miss Stope
r has very kindly given me your    address, and 
I write from here to ask you whether you have   
 reconsidered your decision. My wife is very anx
ious that you should    come, for she has been m
uch attracted by my description of you. We    ar
e willing to give  30 a quarter, or  120 a year,
 so as to    recompense you for any little incon
venience which our fads may    cause you. They a
re not very exacting, after all. My wife is fond
    of a particular shade of electric blue and w
ould like you to wear    such a dress indoors in
 the morning. You need not, however, go to    th
e expense of purchasing one, as we have one belo
nging to my dear    daughter Alice now in Philad
elphia, which would, I should think,    fit you 
very well. Then, as to sitting here or there, or
 amusing    yourself in any manner indicated, th
at need cause you no    inconvenience. As regard
s your hair, it is no doubt a pity,    especiall
y as I could not help remarking its beauty durin
g our    short interview, but I am afraid that I
 must remain firm upon this    point, and I only
 hope that the increased salary may recompense y
ou    for the loss. Your duties, as far as the c
hild is concerned, are    very light. Now do try
 to come, and I shall meet you with the    dog-c
art at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours
 faithfully,    JEPHRO RUCASTLE.That is the lett
er which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and m
y mindis made up that I will accept it. I though
t, however, that beforetaking the final step I s
hould like to submit the whole matter to yourcon
sideration.Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is ma
de up, that settles thequestion, said Holmes, sm
iling.But you would not advise me to refuseI con
fess that it is not the situation which I should
 like to see asister of mine apply for.What is t
he meaning of it all, Mr. HolmesAh, I have no da
ta. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself for
medsome opinionWell, there seems to me to be onl
y one possible solution. Mr. Rucastleseemed to b
e a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not possi
ble that hiswife is a lunatic, that he desires t
o keep the matter quiet for fearshe should be ta
ken to an asylum, and that he humours her fancie
s inevery way in order to prevent an outbreakTha
t is a possible solution-in fact, as matters sta
nd, it is the mostprobable one. But in any case 
it does not seem to be a nice householdfor a you
ng lady.But the money, Mr. Holmes, the moneyWell
, yes, of course the pay is good-too good. That 
is what makes meuneasy. Why should they give you
  120 a year, when they could havetheir pick for
  40 There must be some strong reason behind.I t
hought that if I told you the circumstances you 
would understandafterwards if I wanted your help
. I should feel so much stronger if Ifelt that y
ou were at the back of me.Oh, you may carry that
 feeling away with you. I assure you that yourli
ttle problem promises to be the most interesting
 which has come myway for some months. There is 
something distinctly novel about some ofthe feat
ures. If you should find yourself in doubt or in
 danger-Danger What danger do you foreseeHolmes 
shook his head gravely. It would cease to be a d
anger if wecould define it, said he. But at any 
time, day or night, a telegramwould bring me dow
n to your help.That is enough. She rose briskly 
from her chair with the anxiety allswept from he
r face. I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy 
in mymind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at 
once, sacrifice my poor hairto-night, and start 
for Winchester to-morrow. With a few gratefulwor
ds to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bus
tled off upon herway.At least, said I as we hear
d her quick, firm steps descending thestairs, sh
e seems to be a young lady who is very well able
 to takecare of herself.And she would need to be
, said Holmes gravely. I am much mistaken ifwe d
o not hear from her before many days are past.It
 was not very long before my friends prediction 
was fulfilled. Afortnight went by, during which 
I frequently found my thoughts turningin her dir
ection and wondering what strange side-alley of 
humanexperience this lonely woman had strayed in
to. The unusual salary, thecurious conditions, t
he light duties, all pointed to somethingabnorma
l, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether th
e man were aphilanthropist or a villain, it was 
quite beyond my powers todetermine. As to Holmes
, I observed that he sat frequently for half anh
our on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted
 air, but he swept thematter away with a wave of
 his hand when I mentioned it. Data datadata he 
cried impatiently. I cant make bricks without cl
ay. Andyet he would always wind up by muttering 
that no sister of his shouldever have accepted s
uch a situation.The telegram which we eventually
 received came late one night just as Iwas think
ing of turning in and Holmes was settling down t
o one of thoseall-night chemical researches whic
h he frequently indulged in, when Iwould leave h
im stooping over a retort and a test-tube at nig
ht andfind him in the same position when I came 
down to breakfast in themorning. He opened the y
ellow envelope, and then, glancing at themessage
, threw it across to me.Just look up the trains 
in Bradshaw, said he, and turned back to hischem
ical studies.The summons was a brief and urgent 
one.Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winches
ter at midday to-morrow,it said. Do come I am at
 my wits end.HUNTER.Will you come with me asked 
Holmes, glancing up.I should wish to.Just look i
t up, then.There is a train at half-past nine, s
aid I, glancing over myBradshaw. It is due at Wi
nchester at 1130.That will do very nicely. Then 
perhaps I had better postpone myanalysis of the 
acetones, as we may need to be at our best in th
emorning.By eleven oclock the next day we were w
ell upon our way to the oldEnglish capital. Holm
es had been buried in the morning papers all the
way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire 
border he threw themdown and began to admire the
 scenery. It was an ideal spring day, alight blu
e sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds d
rifting acrossfrom west to east. The sun was shi
ning very brightly, and yet there wasan exhilara
ting nip in the air, which set an edge to a mans
 energy.All over the countryside, away to the ro
lling hills around Aldershot,the little red and 
grey roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out from
amid the light green of the new foliage.Are they
 not fresh and beautiful I cried with all the en
thusiasm ofa man fresh from the fogs of Baker St
reet.But Holmes shook his head gravely.Do you kn
ow, Watson, said he, that it is one of the curse
s of a mindwith a turn like mine that I must loo
k at everything with reference tomy own special 
subject. You look at these scattered houses, and
 you areimpressed by their beauty. I look at the
m, and the only thought whichcomes to me is a fe
eling of their isolation and of the impunity wit
hwhich crime may be committed there.Good heavens
 I cried. Who would associate crime with these d
ear oldhomesteadsThey always fill me with a cert
ain horror. It is my belief, Watson,founded upon
 my experience, that the lowest and vilest alley
s in Londondo not present a more dreadful record
 of sin than does the smiling andbeautiful count
ryside.You horrify meBut the reason is very obvi
ous. The pressure of public opinion can doin the
 town what the law cannot accomplish. There is n
o lane so vilethat the scream of a tortured chil
d, or the thud of a drunkards blow,does not bege
t sympathy and indignation among the neighbours,
 and thenthe whole machinery of justice is ever 
so close that a word ofcomplaint can set it goin
g, and there is but a step between the crimeand 
the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each 
in its own fields,filled for the most part with 
poor ignorant folk who know little of thelaw. Th
ink of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden 
wickedness whichmay go on, year in, year out, in
 such places, and none the wiser. Hadthis lady w
ho appeals to us for help gone to live in Winche
ster, Ishould never have had a fear for her. It 
is the five miles of countrywhich makes the dang
er. Still, it is clear that she is not personall
ythreatened.No. If she can come to Winchester to
 meet us she can get away.Quite so. She has her 
freedom.What can be the matter, then Can you sug
gest no explanationI have devised seven separate
 explanations, each of which would coverthe fact
s as far as we know them. But which of these is 
correct canonly be determined by the fresh infor
mation which we shall no doubtfind waiting for u
s. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, an
d weshall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to
 tell.The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the 
High Street, at no distancefrom the station, and
 there we found the young lady waiting for us. S
hehad engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awai
ted us upon the table.I am so delighted that you
 have come, she said earnestly. It is sovery kin
d of you both; but indeed I do not know what I s
hould do. Youradvice will be altogether invaluab
le to me.Pray tell us what has happened to you.I
 will do so, and I must be quick, for I have pro
mised Mr. Rucastle tobe back before three. I got
 his leave to come into town this morning,though
 he little knew for what purpose.Let us have eve
rything in its due order. Holmes thrust his long
 thinlegs out towards the fire and composed hims
elf to listen.In the first place, I may say that
 I have met, on the whole, with noactual ill-tre
atment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fa
ir tothem to say that. But I cannot understand t
hem, and I am not easy in mymind about them.What
 can you not understandTheir reasons for their c
onduct. But you shall have it all just as itoccu
rred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here
 and drove me inhis dog-cart to the Copper Beech
es. It is, as he said, beautifullysituated, but 
it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large
 squareblock of a house, whitewashed, but all st
ained and streaked with dampand bad weather. The
re are grounds round it, woods on three sides, a
ndon the fourth a field which slopes down to the
 Southampton high road,which curves past about a
 hundred yards from the front door. Thisground i
n front belongs to the house, but the woods all 
round are partof Lord Southertons preserves. A c
lump of copper beeches immediatelyin front of th
e hall door has given its name to the place.I wa
s driven over by my employer, who was as amiable
 as ever, and wasintroduced by him that evening 
to his wife and the child. There was notruth, Mr
. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us t
o be probablein your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs.
 Rucastle is not mad. I found her tobe a silent,
 pale-faced woman, much younger than her husband
, not morethan thirty, I should think, while he 
can hardly be less thanforty-five. From their co
nversation I have gathered that they have beenma
rried about seven years, that he was a widower, 
and that his onlychild by the first wife was the
 daughter who has gone to Philadelphia.Mr. Rucas
tle told me in private that the reason why she h
ad left themwas that she had an unreasoning aver
sion to her stepmother. As thedaughter could not
 have been less than twenty, I can quite imagine
 thather position must have been uncomfortable w
ith her fathers young wife.Mrs. Rucastle seemed 
to me to be colourless in mind as well as infeat
ure. She impressed me neither favourably nor the
 reverse. She was anonentity. It was easy to see
 that she was passionately devoted both toher hu
sband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes
 wanderedcontinually from one to the other, noti
ng every little want andforestalling it if possi
ble. He was kind to her also in his bluff,boiste
rous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be
 a happy couple.And yet she had some secret sorr
ow, this woman. She would often be lostin deep t
hought, with the saddest look upon her face. Mor
e than once Ihave surprised her in tears. I have
 thought sometimes that it was thedisposition of
 her child which weighed upon her mind, for I ha
ve nevermet so utterly spoiled and so ill-nature
d a little creature. He issmall for his age, wit
h a head which is quite disproportionately large
.His whole life appears to be spent in an altern
ation between savagefits of passion and gloomy i
ntervals of sulking. Giving pain to anycreature 
weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of 
amusement, andhe shows quite remarkable talent i
n planning the capture of mice,little birds, and
 insects. But I would rather not talk about thec
reature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little 
to do with my story.I am glad of all details, re
marked my friend, whether they seem toyou to be 
relevant or not.I shall try not to miss anything
 of importance. The one unpleasantthing about th
e house, which struck me at once, was the appear
ance andconduct of the servants. There are only 
two, a man and his wife.Toller, for that is his 
name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzledhair
 and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. T
wice since I havebeen with them he has been quit
e drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed totake no n
otice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong 
woman with asour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastl
e and much less amiable. They are amost unpleasa
nt couple, but fortunately I spend most of my ti
me in thenursery and my own room, which are next
 to each other in one corner ofthe building.For 
two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches 
my life was veryquiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucast
le came down just after breakfast andwhispered s
omething to her husband.Oh, yes, said he, turnin
g to me, we are very much obliged to you,Miss Hu
nter, for falling in with our whims so far as to
 cut your hair.I assure you that it has not detr
acted in the tiniest iota from yourappearance. W
e shall now see how the electric-blue dress will
 becomeyou. You will find it laid out upon the b
ed in your room, and if youwould be so good as t
o put it on we should both be extremely obliged.
The dress which I found waiting for me was of a 
peculiar shade ofblue. It was of excellent mater
ial, a sort of beige, but it boreunmistakable si
gns of having been worn before. It could not hav
e been abetter fit if I had been measured for it
. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastleexpressed a delight 
at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggerate
din its vehemence. They were waiting for me in t
he drawing-room, whichis a very large room, stre
tching along the entire front of the house,with 
three long windows reaching down to the floor. A
 chair had beenplaced close to the central windo
w, with its back turned towards it. Inthis I was
 asked to sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up
 and down onthe other side of the room, began to
 tell me a series of the funnieststories that I 
have ever listened to. You cannot imagine how co
mical hewas, and I laughed until I was quite wea
ry. Mrs. Rucastle, however, whohas evidently no 
sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sa
t withher hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious l
ook upon her face. After anhour or so, Mr. Rucas
tle suddenly remarked that it was time to commen
cethe duties of the day, and that I might change
 my dress and go tolittle Edward in the nursery.
Two days later this same performance was gone th
rough under exactlysimilar circumstances. Again 
I changed my dress, again I sat in thewindow, an
d again I laughed very heartily at the funny sto
ries of whichmy employer had an immense rpertoir
e, and which he told inimitably.Then he handed m
e a yellow-backed novel, and moving my chair a l
ittlesideways, that my own shadow might not fall
 upon the page, he begged meto read aloud to him
. I read for about ten minutes, beginning in the
heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in the mi
ddle of a sentence, heordered me to cease and to
 change my dress.You can easily imagine, Mr. Hol
mes, how curious I became as to whatthe meaning 
of this extraordinary performance could possibly
 be. Theywere always very careful, I observed, t
o turn my face away from thewindow, so that I be
came consumed with the desire to see what was go
ingon behind my back. At first it seemed to be i
mpossible, but I soondevised a means. My hand-mi
rror had been broken, so a happy thoughtseized m
e, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my ha
ndkerchief. Onthe next occasion, in the midst of
 my laughter, I put my handkerchiefup to my eyes
, and was able with a little management to see a
ll thatthere was behind me. I confess that I was
 disappointed. There wasnothing. At least that w
as my first impression. At the second glance,how
ever, I perceived that there was a man standing 
in the SouthamptonRoad, a small bearded man in a
 grey suit, who seemed to be looking inmy direct
ion. The road is an important highway, and there
 are usuallypeople there. This man, however, was
 leaning against the railings whichbordered our 
field and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my
handkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to fin
d her eyes fixed uponme with a most searching ga
ze. She said nothing, but I am convincedthat she
 had divined that I had a mirror in my hand and 
had seen whatwas behind me. She rose at once.Jep
hro, said she, there is an impertinent fellow up
on the roadthere who stares up at Miss Hunter.No
 friend of yours, Miss Hunter he asked.No, I kno
w no one in these parts.Dear me How very imperti
nent Kindly turn round and motion to him togo aw
ay.Surely it would be better to take no notice.N
o, no, we should have him loitering here always.
 Kindly turn roundand wave him away like that.I 
did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. 
Rucastle drew downthe blind. That was a week ago
, and from that time I have not sat againin the 
window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen
 the man in theroad.Pray continue, said Holmes. 
Your narrative promises to be a mostinteresting 
one.You will find it rather disconnected, I fear
, and there may prove tobe little relation betwe
en the different incidents of which I speak. Ont
he very first day that I was at the Copper Beech
es, Mr. Rucastle tookme to a small outhouse whic
h stands near the kitchen door. As weapproached 
it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and th
e sound asof a large animal moving about.Look in
 here said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit betwe
en twoplanks. Is he not a beautyI looked through
 and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a
 vaguefigure huddled up in the darkness.Dont be 
frightened, said my employer, laughing at the st
art which Ihad given. Its only Carlo, my mastiff
. I call him mine, but reallyold Toller, my groo
m, is the only man who can do anything with him.
 Wefeed him once a day, and not too much then, s
o that he is always askeen as mustard. Toller le
ts him loose every night, and God help thetrespa
sser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness s
ake dont youever on any pretext set your foot ov
er the threshold at night, for itsas much as you
r life is worth.The warning was no idle one, for
 two nights later I happened to lookout of my be
droom window about two oclock in the morning. It
 was abeautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in
 front of the house wassilvered over and almost 
as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in thepea
ceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that
 something wasmoving under the shadow of the cop
per beeches. As it emerged into themoonshine I s
aw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as 
a calf,tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black mu
zzle, and huge projectingbones. It walked slowly
 across the lawn and vanished into the shadowupo
n the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a 
chill to my heartwhich I do not think that any b
urglar could have done.And now I have a very str
ange experience to tell you. I had, as youknow, 
cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it i
n a great coil atthe bottom of my trunk. One eve
ning, after the child was in bed, Ibegan to amus
e myself by examining the furniture of my room a
nd byrearranging my own little things. There was
 an old chest of drawers inthe room, the two upp
er ones empty and open, the lower one locked. Ih
ad filled the first two with my linen, and as I 
had still much to packaway I was naturally annoy
ed at not having the use of the third drawer.It 
struck me that it might have been fastened by a 
mere oversight, so Itook out my bunch of keys an
d tried to open it. The very first keyfitted to 
perfection, and I drew the drawer open. There wa
s only onething in it, but I am sure that you wo
uld never guess what it was. Itwas my coil of ha
ir.I took it up and examined it. It was of the s
ame peculiar tint, andthe same thickness. But th
en the impossibility of the thing obtrudeditself
 upon me. How could my hair have been locked in 
the drawer Withtrembling hands I undid my trunk,
 turned out the contents, and drewfrom the botto
m my own hair. I laid the two tresses together, 
and Iassure you that they were identical. Was it
 not extraordinary Puzzleas I would, I could mak
e nothing at all of what it meant. I returnedthe
 strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing 
of the matter to theRucastles as I felt that I h
ad put myself in the wrong by opening adrawer wh
ich they had locked.I am naturally observant, as
 you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and Isoon ha
d a pretty good plan of the whole house in my he
ad. There wasone wing, however, which appeared n
ot to be inhabited at all. A doorwhich faced tha
t which led into the quarters of the Tollers ope
ned intothis suite, but it was invariably locked
. One day, however, as Iascended the stair, I me
t Mr. Rucastle coming out through this door,his 
keys in his hand, and a look on his face which m
ade him a verydifferent person to the round, jov
ial man to whom I was accustomed. Hischeeks were
 red, his brow was all crinkled with anger, and 
the veinsstood out at his temples with passion. 
He locked the door and hurriedpast me without a 
word or a look.This aroused my curiosity, so whe
n I went out for a walk in thegrounds with my ch
arge, I strolled round to the side from which I 
couldsee the windows of this part of the house. 
There were four of them in arow, three of which 
were simply dirty, while the fourth was shuttere
dup. They were evidently all deserted. As I stro
lled up and down,glancing at them occasionally, 
Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking asmerry and
 jovial as ever.Ah said he, you must not think m
e rude if I passed you without aword, my dear yo
ung lady. I was preoccupied with business matter
s.I assured him that I was not offended. By the 
way, said I, you seemto have quite a suite of sp
are rooms up there, and one of them has theshutt
ers up.He looked surprised and, as it seemed to 
me, a little startled at myremark.Photography is
 one of my hobbies, said he. I have made my dark
 roomup there. But, dear me what an observant yo
ung lady we have come upon.Who would have believ
ed it Who would have ever believed it He spokein
 a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his ey
es as he looked atme. I read suspicion there and
 annoyance, but no jest.Well, Mr. Holmes, from t
he moment that I understood that there wassometh
ing about that suite of rooms which I was not to
 know, I was allon fire to go over them. It was 
not mere curiosity, though I have myshare of tha
t. It was more a feeling of duty-a feeling that 
some goodmight come from my penetrating to this 
place. They talk of womansinstinct; perhaps it w
as womans instinct which gave me that feeling.At
 any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the
 lookout for anychance to pass the forbidden doo
r.It was only yesterday that the chance came. I 
may tell you that,besides Mr. Rucastle, both Tol
ler and his wife find something to do inthese de
serted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a larg
e black linenbag with him through the door. Rece
ntly he has been drinking hard, andyesterday eve
ning he was very drunk; and when I came upstairs
 there wasthe key in the door. I have no doubt a
t all that he had left it there.Mr. and Mrs. Ruc
astle were both downstairs, and the child was wi
ththem, so that I had an admirable opportunity. 
I turned the key gentlyin the lock, opened the d
oor, and slipped through.There was a little pass
age in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,whi
ch turned at a right angle at the farther end. R
ound this cornerwere three doors in a line, the 
first and third of which were open.They each led
 into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with t
wo windowsin the one and one in the other, so th
ick with dirt that the eveninglight glimmered di
mly through them. The centre door was closed, an
dacross the outside of it had been fastened one 
of the broad bars of aniron bed, padlocked at on
e end to a ring in the wall, and fastened atthe 
other with stout cord. The door itself was locke
d as well, and thekey was not there. This barric
aded door corresponded clearly with theshuttered
 window outside, and yet I could see by the glim
mer frombeneath it that the room was not in dark
ness. Evidently there was askylight which let in
 light from above. As I stood in the passagegazi
ng at the sinister door and wondering what secre
t it might veil, Isuddenly heard the sound of st
eps within the room and saw a shadow passbackwar
d and forward against the little slit of dim lig
ht which shoneout from under the door. A mad, un
reasoning terror rose up in me at thesight, Mr. 
Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly,
 and Iturned and ran-ran as though some dreadful
 hand were behind meclutching at the skirt of my
 dress. I rushed down the passage, throughthe do
or, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, 
who was waitingoutside.So, said he, smiling, it 
was you, then. I thought that it must bewhen I s
aw the door open.Oh, I am so frightened I panted
.My dear young lady my dear young lady-you canno
t think howcaressing and soothing his manner was
-and what has frightened you, mydear young ladyB
ut his voice was just a little too coaxing. He o
verdid it. I waskeenly on my guard against him.I
 was foolish enough to go into the empty wing, I
 answered. But itis so lonely and eerie in this 
dim light that I was frightened and ranout again
. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in thereOnly tha
t said he, looking at me keenly.Why, what did yo
u think I asked.Why do you think that I lock thi
s doorI am sure that I do not know.It is to keep
 people out who have no business there. Do you s
ee Hewas still smiling in the most amiable manne
r.I am sure if I had known-Well, then, you know 
now. And if you ever put your foot over thatthre
shold again-here in an instant the smile hardene
d into a grin ofrage, and he glared down at me w
ith the face of a demon-Ill throw youto the mast
iff.I was so terrified that I do not know what I
 did. I suppose that Imust have rushed past him 
into my room. I remember nothing until Ifound my
self lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I 
thought of you,Mr. Holmes. I could not live ther
e longer without some advice. I wasfrightened of
 the house, of the man, of the woman, of the ser
vants,even of the child. They were all horrible 
to me. If I could only bringyou down all would b
e well. Of course I might have fled from the hou
se,but my curiosity was almost as strong as my f
ears. My mind was soonmade up. I would send you 
a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went downto t
he office, which is about half a mile from the h
ouse, and thenreturned, feeling very much easier
. A horrible doubt came into my mindas I approac
hed the door lest the dog might be loose, but I 
rememberedthat Toller had drunk himself into a s
tate of insensibility thatevening, and I knew th
at he was the only one in the household who hada
ny influence with the savage creature, or who wo
uld venture to set himfree. I slipped in in safe
ty and lay awake half the night in my joy atthe 
thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in ge
tting leave to comeinto Winchester this morning,
 but I must be back before three oclock,for Mr. 
and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will
 be away allthe evening, so that I must look aft
er the child. Now I have told youall my adventur
es, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you
 couldtell me what it all means, and, above all,
 what I should do.Holmes and I had listened spel
lbound to this extraordinary story. Myfriend ros
e now and paced up and down the room, his hands 
in hispockets, and an expression of the most pro
found gravity upon his face.Is Toller still drun
k he asked.Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucas
tle that she could do nothingwith him.That is we
ll. And the Rucastles go out to-nightYes.Is ther
e a cellar with a good strong lockYes, the wine-
cellar.You seem to me to have acted all through 
this matter like a very braveand sensible girl, 
Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform
 onemore feat I should not ask it of you if I di
d not think you a quiteexceptional woman.I will 
try. What is itWe shall be at the Copper Beeches
 by seven oclock, my friend and I.The Rucastles 
will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we h
ope, beincapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller
, who might give the alarm. Ifyou could send her
 into the cellar on some errand, and then turn t
hekey upon her, you would facilitate matters imm
ensely.I will do it.Excellent We shall then look
 thoroughly into the affair. Of coursethere is o
nly one feasible explanation. You have been brou
ght there topersonate someone, and the real pers
on is imprisoned in this chamber.That is obvious
. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt th
at it isthe daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I 
remember right, who was said tohave gone to Amer
ica. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling h
er inheight, figure, and the colour of your hair
. Hers had been cut off,very possibly in some il
lness through which she has passed, and so, ofco
urse, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curi
ous chance you cameupon her tresses. The man in 
the road was undoubtedly some friend ofhers-poss
ibly her fianc-and no doubt, as you wore the gir
ls dressand were so like her, he was convinced f
rom your laughter, whenever hesaw you, and after
wards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle wasp
erfectly happy, and that she no longer desired h
is attentions. The dogis let loose at night to p
revent him from endeavouring to communicatewith 
her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious p
oint in the caseis the disposition of the child.
What on earth has that to do with it I ejaculate
d.My dear Watson, you as a medical man are conti
nually gaining light asto the tendencies of a ch
ild by the study of the parents. Dont you seetha
t the converse is equally valid. I have frequent
ly gained my firstreal insight into the characte
r of parents by studying their children.This chi
lds disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for 
crueltyssake, and whether he derives this from h
is smiling father, as I shouldsuspect, or from h
is mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who i
s intheir power.I am sure that you are right, Mr
. Holmes, cried our client. Athousand things com
e back to me which make me certain that you have
 hitit. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringi
ng help to this poorcreature.We must be circumsp
ect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man.
 Wecan do nothing until seven oclock. At that ho
ur we shall be with you,and it will not be long 
before we solve the mystery.We were as good as o
ur word, for it was just seven when we reached t
heCopper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wa
yside public-house. Thegroup of trees, with thei
r dark leaves shining like burnished metal inthe
 light of the setting sun, were sufficient to ma
rk the house evenhad Miss Hunter not been standi
ng smiling on the door-step.Have you managed it 
asked Holmes.A loud thudding noise came from som
ewhere downstairs. That is Mrs.Toller in the cel
lar, said she. Her husband lies snoring on theki
tchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the dupl
icates of Mr.Rucastles.You have done well indeed
 cried Holmes with enthusiasm. Now leadthe way, 
and we shall soon see the end of this black busi
ness.We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, 
followed on down a passage,and found ourselves i
n front of the barricade which Miss Hunter hadde
scribed. Holmes cut the cord and removed the tra
nsverse bar. Then hetried the various keys in th
e lock, but without success. No sound camefrom w
ithin, and at the silence Holmes face clouded ov
er.I trust that we are not too late, said he. I 
think, Miss Hunter,that we had better go in with
out you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder toit, an
d we shall see whether we cannot make our way in
.It was an old rickety door and gave at once bef
ore our united strength.Together we rushed into 
the room. It was empty. There was no furnituresa
ve a little pallet bed, a small table, and a bas
ketful of linen. Theskylight above was open, and
 the prisoner gone.There has been some villainy 
here, said Holmes; this beauty hasguessed Miss H
unters intentions and has carried his victim off
.But howThrough the skylight. We shall soon see 
how he managed it. He swunghimself up onto the r
oof. Ah, yes, he cried, heres the end of along l
ight ladder against the eaves. That is how he di
d it.But it is impossible, said Miss Hunter; the
 ladder was not therewhen the Rucastles went awa
y.He has come back and done it. I tell you that 
he is a clever anddangerous man. I should not be
 very much surprised if this were hewhose step I
 hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that 
it would beas well for you to have your pistol r
eady.The words were hardly out of his mouth befo
re a man appeared at thedoor of the room, a very
 fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in hishan
d. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the w
all at the sight ofhim, but Sherlock Holmes spra
ng forward and confronted him.You villain said h
e, wheres your daughterThe fat man cast his eyes
 round, and then up at the open skylight.It is f
or me to ask you that, he shrieked, you thieves 
Spies andthieves I have caught you, have I You a
re in my power. Ill serveyou He turned and clatt
ered down the stairs as hard as he could go.Hes 
gone for the dog cried Miss Hunter.I have my rev
olver, said I.Better close the front door, cried
 Holmes, and we all rushed down thestairs togeth
er. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard
 thebaying of a hound, and then a scream of agon
y, with a horrible worryingsound which it was dr
eadful to listen to. An elderly man with a redfa
ce and shaking limbs came staggering out at a si
de door.My God he cried. Someone has loosed the 
dog. Its not been fed fortwo days. Quick, quick,
 or itll be too lateHolmes and I rushed out and 
round the angle of the house, with Tollerhurryin
g behind us. There was the huge famished brute, 
its black muzzleburied in Rucastles throat, whil
e he writhed and screamed upon theground. Runnin
g up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over wi
th itskeen white teeth still meeting in the grea
t creases of his neck. Withmuch labour we separa
ted them and carried him, living but horriblyman
gled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawi
ng-room sofa, andhaving dispatched the sobered T
oller to bear the news to his wife, Idid what I 
could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled
 round himwhen the door opened, and a tall, gaun
t woman entered the room.Mrs. Toller cried Miss 
Hunter.Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when h
e came back before he went upto you. Ah, miss, i
t is a pity you didnt let me know what you werep
lanning, for I would have told you that your pai
ns were wasted.Ha said Holmes, looking keenly at
 her. It is clear that Mrs. Tollerknows more abo
ut this matter than anyone else.Yes, sir, I do, 
and I am ready enough to tell what I know.Then, 
pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are
 several pointson which I must confess that I am
 still in the dark.I will soon make it clear to 
you, said she; and Id have done sobefore now if 
I could ha got out from the cellar. If therespol
ice-court business over this, youll remember tha
t I was the onethat stood your friend, and that 
I was Miss Alices friend too.She was never happy
 at home, Miss Alice wasnt, from the time that h
erfather married again. She was slighted like an
d had no say in anything,but it never really bec
ame bad for her until after she met Mr. Fowlerat
 a friends house. As well as I could learn, Miss
 Alice had rights ofher own by will, but she was
 so quiet and patient, she was, that shenever sa
id a word about them but just left everything in
 Mr. Rucastleshands. He knew he was safe with he
r; but when there was a chance of ahusband comin
g forward, who would ask for all that the law wo
uld givehim, then her father thought it time to 
put a stop on it. He wanted herto sign a paper, 
so that whether she married or not, he could use
 hermoney. When she wouldnt do it, he kept on wo
rrying her until she gotbrain-fever, and for six
 weeks was at deaths door. Then she got betterat
 last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beauti
ful hair cut off; butthat didnt make no change i
n her young man, and he stuck to her astrue as m
an could be.Ah, said Holmes, I think that what y
ou have been good enough to tellus makes the mat
ter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that
remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to t
his system ofimprisonmentYes, sir.And brought Mi
ss Hunter down from London in order to get rid o
f thedisagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.That
 was it, sir.But Mr. Fowler being a persevering 
man, as a good seaman should be,blockaded the ho
use, and having met you succeeded by certain arg
uments,metallic or otherwise, in convincing you 
that your interests were thesame as his.Mr. Fowl
er was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman
, said Mrs.Toller serenely.And in this way he ma
naged that your good man should have no want ofd
rink, and that a ladder should be ready at the m
oment when your masterhad gone out.You have it, 
sir, just as it happened.I am sure we owe you an
 apology, Mrs. Toller, said Holmes, for youhave 
certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us
. And here comesthe country surgeon and Mrs. Ruc
astle, so I think, Watson, that we hadbest escor
t Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to
 me that ourlocus standi now is rather a questio
nable one.And thus was solved the mystery of the
 sinister house with the copperbeeches in front 
of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was alwa
ys abroken man, kept alive solely through the ca
re of his devoted wife.They still live with thei
r old servants, who probably know so much ofRuca
stles past life that he finds it difficult to pa
rt from them. Mr.Fowler and Miss Rucastle were m
arried, by special license, inSouthampton the da
y after their flight, and he is now the holder o
f agovernment appointment in the island of Mauri
tius. As to Miss VioletHunter, my friend Holmes,
 rather to my disappointment, manifested nofurth
er interest in her when once she had ceased to b
e the centre ofone of his problems, and she is n
ow the head of a private school atWalsall, where
 I believe that she has met with considerable su
ccess.                     END OF THE PROJECT GU
TENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES 
            Updated editions will replace the pr
evious one-the old editions willbe renamed.Creat
ing the works from print editions not protected 
by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a Un
ited States copyright in these works,so the Foun
dation and you can copy and distribute it in the
 UnitedStates without permission and without pay
ing copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth
 in the General Terms of Use partof this license
, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGuten
berg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUT
ENBERGconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg i
s a registered trademark,and may not be used if 
you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe 
terms of the trademark license, including paying
 royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trade
mark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of
 this eBook, complying with the trademark licens
e is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly
 any purpose such as creationof derivative works
, reports, performances and research. ProjectGut
enberg eBooks may be modified and printed and gi
ven away-you maydo practically ANYTHING in the U
nited States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. co
pyright law. Redistribution is subject to the tr
ademarklicense, especially commercial redistribu
tion.START FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBER
G LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE 
OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg
 mission of promoting the freedistribution of el
ectronic works, by using or distributing this wo
rkor any other work associated in any way with t
he phrase ProjectGutenberg, you agree to comply 
with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg 
License available with this file or online atwww
.gutenberg.orglicense.Section 1. General Terms o
f Use and Redistributing Project Gutenbergelectr
onic works1.A. By reading or using any part of t
his Project Gutenbergelectronic work, you indica
te that you have read, understand, agree toand a
ccept all the terms of this license and intellec
tual propertytrademarkcopyright agreement. If yo
u do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this 
agreement, you must cease using and return ordes
troy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic 
works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for o
btaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenbe
rg electronic work and you do not agree to be bo
undby the terms of this agreement, you may obtai
n a refund from the personor entity to whom you 
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B
. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. I
t may only beused on or associated in any way wi
th an electronic work by people whoagree to be b
ound by the terms of this agreement. There are a
 fewthings that you can do with most Project Gut
enberg electronic workseven without complying wi
th the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagrap
h 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can d
o with ProjectGutenberg electronic works if you 
follow the terms of thisagreement and help prese
rve free future access to Project Gutenbergelect
ronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Pr
oject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation theF
oundation or PGLAF, owns a compilation copyright
 in the collectionof Project Gutenberg electroni
c works. Nearly all the individualworks in the c
ollection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by 
copyright law in theUnited States and you are lo
cated in the United States, we do notclaim a rig
ht to prevent you from copying, distributing, pe
rforming,displaying or creating derivative works
 based on the work as long asall references to P
roject Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg miss
ion of promotingfree access to electronic works 
by freely sharing Project Gutenbergworks in comp
liance with the terms of this agreement for keep
ing theProject Gutenberg name associated with th
e work. You can easilycomply with the terms of t
his agreement by keeping this work in thesame fo
rmat with its attached full Project Gutenberg Li
cense whenyou share it without charge with other
s.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you
 are located also governwhat you can do with thi
s work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a
 constant state of change. If you are outside th
e United States,check the laws of your country i
n addition to the terms of thisagreement before 
downloading, copying, displaying, performing,dis
tributing or creating derivative works based on 
this work or anyother Project Gutenberg work. Th
e Foundation makes norepresentations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in anycountry o
ther than the United States.1.E. Unless you have
 removed all references to Project Gutenberg1.E.
1. The following sentence, with active links to,
 or otherimmediate access to, the full Project G
utenberg License must appearprominently whenever
 any copy of a Project Gutenberg work any workon
 which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or 
with which thephrase Project Gutenberg is associ
ated is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, c
opied or distributed    This eBook is for the us
e of anyone anywhere in the United States and mo
st    other parts of the world at no cost and wi
th almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may
 copy it, give it away or re-use it under the te
rms    of the Project Gutenberg License included
 with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.o
rg. If you    are not located in the United Stat
es, you will have to check the laws    of the co
untry where you are located before using this eB
ook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg 
electronic work isderived from texts not protect
ed by U.S. copyright law does notcontain a notic
e indicating that it is posted with permission o
f thecopyright holder, the work can be copied an
d distributed to anyone inthe United States with
out paying any fees or charges. If you areredist
ributing or providing access to a work with the 
phrase ProjectGutenberg associated with or appea
ring on the work, you must complyeither with the
 requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 
orobtain permission for the use of the work and 
the Project Gutenbergtrademark as set forth in p
aragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual
 Project Gutenberg electronic work is postedwith
 the permission of the copyright holder, your us
e and distributionmust comply with both paragrap
hs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms i
mposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License 
for all worksposted with the permission of the c
opyright holder found at thebeginning of this wo
rk.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the 
full Project GutenbergLicense terms from this wo
rk, or any files containing a part of thiswork o
r any other work associated with Project Gutenbe
rg.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distrib
ute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any 
part of this electronic work, withoutprominently
 displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 
1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to th
e full terms of the ProjectGutenberg License.1.E
.6. You may convert to and distribute this work 
in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonpropriet
ary or proprietary form, includingany word proce
ssing or hypertext form. However, if you provide
 accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gute
nberg work in a formatother than Plain Vanilla A
SCII or other format used in the officialversion
 posted on the official Project Gutenberg websit
ewww.gutenberg.org, you must, at no additional c
ost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, 
a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtain
ing a copy upon request, of the work in its orig
inal PlainVanilla ASCII or other form. Any alter
nate format must include thefull Project Gutenbe
rg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7
. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, di
splaying,performing, copying or distributing any
 Project Gutenberg worksunless you comply with p
aragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a 
reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess 
to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic 
worksprovided that     You pay a royalty fee of 
20 of the gross profits you derive from        t
he use of Project Gutenberg works calculated usi
ng the method        you already use to calculat
e your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark,
 but he has        agreed to donate royalties un
der this paragraph to the Project        Gutenbe
rg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments
 must be paid        within 60 days following ea
ch date on which you prepare or are        legal
ly required to prepare your periodic tax returns
. Royalty        payments should be clearly mark
ed as such and sent to the Project        Gutenb
erg Literary Archive Foundation at the address s
pecified in        Section 4, Information about 
donations to the Project Gutenberg        Litera
ry Archive Foundation.         You provide a ful
l refund of any money paid by a user who notifie
s        you in writing or by e-mail within 30 d
ays of receipt that she        does not agree to
 the terms of the full Project Gutenberg        
License. You must require such a user to return 
or destroy all        copies of the works posses
sed in a physical medium and discontinue        
all use of and all access to other copies of Pro
ject Gutenberg        works.         You provide
, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full ref
und of        any money paid for a work or a rep
lacement copy, if a defect in the        electro
nic work is discovered and reported to you withi
n 90 days of        receipt of the work.        
 You comply with all other terms of this agreeme
nt for free        distribution of Project Guten
berg works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fe
e or distribute a ProjectGutenberg electronic wo
rk or group of works on different terms thanare 
set forth in this agreement, you must obtain per
mission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Lit
erary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Proj
ect Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation 
as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Projec
t Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend cons
iderableeffort to identify, do copyright researc
h on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protecte
d by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectG
utenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Proj
ect Gutenbergelectronic works, and the medium on
 which they may be stored, maycontain Defects, s
uch as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccura
teor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyr
ight or otherintellectual property infringement,
 a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a c
omputer virus, or computer codes that damage orc
annot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED W
ARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the 
Rightof Replacement or Refund described in parag
raph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archiv
e Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg 
trademark, and any other party distributing a Pr
ojectGutenberg electronic work under this agreem
ent, disclaim allliability to you for damages, c
osts and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGRE
E THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRI
CTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CON
TRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. Y
OU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER
, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL 
NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT
, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES E
VEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUC
HDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR R
EFUND - If you discover adefect in this electron
ic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canr
eceive a refund of the money if any you paid for
 it by sending awritten explanation to the perso
n you received the work from. If youreceived the
 work on a physical medium, you must return the 
mediumwith your written explanation. The person 
or entity that provided youwith the defective wo
rk may elect to provide a replacement copy inlie
u of a refund. If you received the work electron
ically, the personor entity providing it to you 
may choose to give you a secondopportunity to re
ceive the work electronically in lieu of a refun
d. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may 
demand a refund in writingwithout further opport
unities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the
 limited right of replacement or refund set fort
hin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to yo
u AS-IS, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EX
PRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WA
RRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY P
URPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaime
rs of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion
 or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If an
y disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agr
eementviolates the law of the state applicable t
o this agreement, theagreement shall be interpre
ted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation 
permitted by the applicable state law. The inval
idity orunenforceability of any provision of thi
s agreement shall not void theremaining provisio
ns.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and
 hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any ag
ent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneprovidi
ng copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works 
inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunt
eers associated with theproduction, promotion an
d distribution of Project Gutenbergelectronic wo
rks, harmless from all liability, costs and expe
nses,including legal fees, that arise directly o
r indirectly from any ofthe following which you 
do or cause to occur a distribution of thisor an
y Project Gutenberg work, b alteration, modifica
tion, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gu
tenberg work, and c anyDefect you cause.Section 
2. Information about the Mission of Project Gute
nbergProject Gutenberg is synonymous with the fr
ee distribution ofelectronic works in formats re
adable by the widest variety ofcomputers includi
ng obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
 Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of 
volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks
 of life.Volunteers and financial support to pro
vide volunteers with theassistance they need are
 critical to reaching Project Gutenbergsgoals an
d ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection
 willremain freely available for generations to 
come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Arc
hive Foundation was created to provide a securea
nd permanent future for Project Gutenberg and fu
turegenerations. To learn more about the Project
 Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how yo
ur efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3
 and 4 and the Foundation information page at ww
w.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the
 Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationTh
e Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation 
is a non-profit501c3 educational corporation org
anized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi
 and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRe
venue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal ta
x identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributi
ons to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Fou
ndation are tax deductible to the full extent pe
rmitted byU.S. federal laws and your states laws
.The Foundations business office is located at 8
09 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, 801
 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date con
tact information can be found at the Foundations
 websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.orgco
ntactSection 4. Information about Donations to t
he Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationP
roject Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive
 without widespreadpublic support and donations 
to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number
 of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form acce
ssible by the widestarray of equipment including
 outdated equipment. Many small donations1 to 5,
000 are particularly important to maintaining ta
x exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is co
mmitted to complying with the laws regulatingcha
rities and charitable donations in all 50 states
 of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements ar
e not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort,
 much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep u
pwith these requirements. We do not solicit dona
tions in locationswhere we have not received wri
tten confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATION
S or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular statevisit www.gutenberg.orgdonate.Wh
ile we cannot and do not solicit contributions f
rom states where wehave not met the solicitation
 requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst 
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in s
uch states whoapproach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted,
 but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax
 treatment of donations received fromoutside the
 United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small 
staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pag
es for current donationmethods and addresses. Do
nations are accepted in a number of otherways in
cluding checks, online payments and credit card 
donations. Todonate, please visit www.gutenberg.
orgdonate.Section 5. General Information About P
roject Gutenberg electronic worksProfessor Micha
el S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGute
nberg concept of a library of electronic works t
hat could befreely shared with anyone. For forty
 years, he produced anddistributed Project Guten
berg eBooks with only a loose network ofvoluntee
r support.Project Gutenberg eBooks are often cre
ated from several printededitions, all of which 
are confirmed as not protected by copyright inth
e U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Th
us, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in complian
ce with any particular paperedition.Most people 
start at our website which has the main PG searc
hfacility www.gutenberg.org.This website include
s information about Project Gutenberg,including 
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg L
iteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce o
ur new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email 
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
