A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIATo Sherlock Holmes she is al
ways the woman. I have seldom heard himmention h
er under any other name. In his eyes she eclipse
s andpredominates the whole of her sex. It was n
ot that he felt any emotionakin to love for Iren
e Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly
,were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirab
ly balanced mind. Hewas, I take it, the most per
fect reasoning and observing machine thatthe wor
ld has seen, but as a lover he would have placed
 himself in afalse position. He never spoke of t
he softer passions, save with a gibeand a sneer.
 They were admirable things for the observer-exc
ellent fordrawing the veil from mens motives and
 actions. But for the trainedreasoner to admit s
uch intrusions into his own delicate and finelya
djusted temperament was to introduce a distracti
ng factor which mightthrow a doubt upon all his 
mental results. Grit in a sensitiveinstrument, o
r a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, w
ould notbe more disturbing than a strong emotion
 in a nature such as his. Andyet there was but o
ne woman to him, and that woman was the late Ire
neAdler, of dubious and questionable memory.I ha
d seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had 
drifted us awayfrom each other. My own complete 
happiness, and the home-centredinterests which r
ise up around the man who first finds himself ma
sterof his own establishment, were sufficient to
 absorb all my attention,while Holmes, who loath
ed every form of society with his whole Bohemian
soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, 
buried among his oldbooks, and alternating from 
week to week between cocaine and ambition,the dr
owsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of h
is own keennature. He was still, as ever, deeply
 attracted by the study of crime,and occupied hi
s immense faculties and extraordinary powers ofo
bservation in following out those clues, and cle
aring up thosemysteries which had been abandoned
 as hopeless by the official police.From time to
 time I heard some vague account of his doings o
f hissummons to Odessa in the case of the Trepof
f murder, of his clearing upof the singular trag
edy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee, and
finally of the mission which he had accomplished
 so delicately andsuccessfully for the reigning 
family of Holland. Beyond these signs ofhis acti
vity, however, which I merely shared with all th
e readers ofthe daily press, I knew little of my
 former friend and companion.One night-it was on
 the twentieth of March, 1888-I was returning fr
om ajourney to a patient for I had now returned 
to civil practice, whenmy way led me through Bak
er Street. As I passed the well-remembereddoor, 
which must always be associated in my mind with 
my wooing, andwith the dark incidents of the Stu
dy in Scarlet, I was seized with akeen desire to
 see Holmes again, and to know how he was employ
ing hisextraordinary powers. His rooms were bril
liantly lit, and, even as Ilooked up, I saw his 
tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouet
teagainst the blind. He was pacing the room swif
tly, eagerly, with hishead sunk upon his chest a
nd his hands clasped behind him. To me, whoknew 
his every mood and habit, his attitude and manne
r told their ownstory. He was at work again. He 
had risen out of his drug-createddreams and was 
hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang t
he belland was shown up to the chamber which had
 formerly been in part my own.His manner was not
 effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I thi
nk,to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but wit
h a kindly eye, he wavedme to an armchair, threw
 across his case of cigars, and indicated aspiri
t case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he sto
od before the fireand looked me over in his sing
ular introspective fashion.Wedlock suits you, he
 remarked. I think, Watson, that you have puton 
seven and a half pounds since I saw you.Seven I 
answered.Indeed, I should have thought a little 
more. Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson. And in
 practice again, I observe. You did not tell met
hat you intended to go into harness.Then, how do
 you knowI see it, I deduce it. How do I know th
at you have been gettingyourself very wet lately
, and that you have a most clumsy and carelessse
rvant girlMy dear Holmes, said I, this is too mu
ch. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you
 lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I ha
d acountry walk on Thursday and came home in a d
readful mess, but as Ihave changed my clothes I 
cant imagine how you deduce it. As to MaryJane, 
she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her n
otice, but there,again, I fail to see how you wo
rk it out.He chuckled to himself and rubbed his 
long, nervous hands together.It is simplicity it
self, said he; my eyes tell me that on the insid
eof your left shoe, just where the firelight str
ikes it, the leather isscored by six almost para
llel cuts. Obviously they have been caused bysom
eone who has very carelessly scraped round the e
dges of the sole inorder to remove crusted mud f
rom it. Hence, you see, my doublededuction that 
you had been out in vile weather, and that you h
ad aparticularly malignant boot-slitting specime
n of the London slavey. Asto your practice, if a
 gentleman walks into my rooms smelling ofiodofo
rm, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon 
his rightforefinger, and a bulge on the right si
de of his top-hat to show wherehe has secreted h
is stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do 
notpronounce him to be an active member of the m
edical profession.I could not help laughing at t
he ease with which he explained hisprocess of de
duction. When I hear you give your reasons, I re
marked,the thing always appears to me to be so r
idiculously simple that Icould easily do it myse
lf, though at each successive instance of yourre
asoning I am baffled until you explain your proc
ess. And yet Ibelieve that my eyes are as good a
s yours.Quite so, he answered, lighting a cigare
tte, and throwing himselfdown into an armchair. 
You see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction 
is clear. For example, you have frequently seen 
the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this roo
m.Frequently.How oftenWell, some hundreds of tim
es.Then how many are thereHow many I dont know.Q
uite so You have not observed. And yet you have 
seen. That is justmy point. Now, I know that the
re are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen 
and observed. By the way, since you are interest
ed in theselittle problems, and since you are go
od enough to chronicle one or twoof my trifling 
experiences, you may be interested in this. He t
hrewover a sheet of thick, pink-tinted notepaper
 which had been lying openupon the table. It cam
e by the last post, said he. Read it aloud.The n
ote was undated, and without either signature or
 address.There will call upon you to-night, at a
 quarter to eight oclock, itsaid, a gentleman wh
o desires to consult you upon a matter of the ve
rydeepest moment. Your recent services to one of
 the royal houses ofEurope have shown that you a
re one who may safely be trusted withmatters whi
ch are of an importance which can hardly be exag
gerated.This account of you we have from all qua
rters received. Be in yourchamber then at that h
our, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwea
r a mask.This is indeed a mystery, I remarked. W
hat do you imagine that itmeansI have no data ye
t. It is a capital mistake to theorise before on
e hasdata. Insensibly one begins to twist facts 
to suit theories, instead oftheories to suit fac
ts. But the note itself. What do you deduce from
itI carefully examined the writing, and the pape
r upon which it waswritten.The man who wrote it 
was presumably well to do, I remarked,endeavouri
ng to imitate my companions processes. Such pape
r could notbe bought under half a crown a packet
. It is peculiarly strong andstiff.Peculiar-that
 is the very word, said Holmes. It is not an Eng
lishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light.I did 
so, and saw a large E with a small g, a P, and a
 large Gwith a small t woven into the texture of
 the paper.What do you make of that asked Holmes
.The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogra
m, rather.Not at all. The G with the small t sta
nds for Gesellschaft,which is the German for Com
pany. It is a customary contraction likeour Co. 
P, of course, stands for Papier. Now for the Eg.
 Let usglance at our Continental Gazetteer. He t
ook down a heavy brown volumefrom his shelves. E
glow, Eglonitz-here we are, Egria. It is in aGer
man-speaking country-in Bohemia, not far from Ca
rlsbad. Remarkableas being the scene of the deat
h of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-fact
ories and paper-mills. Ha, ha, my boy, what do y
ou make ofthat His eyes sparkled, and he sent up
 a great blue triumphant cloudfrom his cigarette
.The paper was made in Bohemia, I said.Precisely
. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do
 you note thepeculiar construction of the senten
ce-This account of you we have fromall quarters 
received. A Frenchman or Russian could not have 
writtenthat. It is the German who is so uncourte
ous to his verbs. It onlyremains, therefore, to 
discover what is wanted by this German whowrites
 upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask 
to showing hisface. And here he comes, if I am n
ot mistaken, to resolve all ourdoubts.As he spok
e there was the sharp sound of horses hoofs and 
gratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sh
arp pull at the bell. Holmeswhistled.A pair, by 
the sound, said he. Yes, he continued, glancing 
out ofthe window. A nice little brougham and a p
air of beauties. A hundredand fifty guineas apie
ce. Theres money in this case, Watson, if therei
s nothing else.I think that I had better go, Hol
mes.Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am 
lost without my Boswell.And this promises to be 
interesting. It would be a pity to miss it.But y
our client-Never mind him. I may want your help,
 and so may he. Here he comes.Sit down in that a
rmchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention
.A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upo
n the stairs and in thepassage, paused immediate
ly outside the door. Then there was a loud andau
thoritative tap.Come in said Holmes.A man entere
d who could hardly have been less than six feet 
six inchesin height, with the chest and limbs of
 a Hercules. His dress was richwith a richness w
hich would, in England, be looked upon as akin t
o badtaste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashe
d across the sleeves andfronts of his double-bre
asted coat, while the deep blue cloak which wast
hrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-co
loured silk andsecured at the neck with a brooch
 which consisted of a single flamingberyl. Boots
 which extended halfway up his calves, and which
 weretrimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, co
mpleted the impression ofbarbaric opulence which
 was suggested by his whole appearance. Hecarrie
d a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore
 across the upperpart of his face, extending dow
n past the cheekbones, a black vizardmask, which
 he had apparently adjusted that very moment, fo
r his handwas still raised to it as he entered. 
From the lower part of the facehe appeared to be
 a man of strong character, with a thick, hangin
g lip,and a long, straight chin suggestive of re
solution pushed to the lengthof obstinacy.You ha
d my note he asked with a deep harsh voice and a
 stronglymarked German accent. I told you that I
 would call. He looked fromone to the other of u
s, as if uncertain which to address.Pray take a 
seat, said Holmes. This is my friend and colleag
ue, Dr.Watson, who is occasionally good enough t
o help me in my cases. Whomhave I the honour to 
addressYou may address me as the Count Von Kramm
, a Bohemian nobleman. Iunderstand that this gen
tleman, your friend, is a man of honour anddiscr
etion, whom I may trust with a matter of the mos
t extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefe
r to communicate with youalone.I rose to go, but
 Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me bac
k intomy chair. It is both, or none, said he. Yo
u may say before thisgentleman anything which yo
u may say to me.The Count shrugged his broad sho
ulders. Then I must begin, said he,by binding yo
u both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the
 end ofthat time the matter will be of no import
ance. At present it is not toomuch to say that i
t is of such weight it may have an influence upo
nEuropean history.I promise, said Holmes.And I.Y
ou will excuse this mask, continued our strange 
visitor. The augustperson who employs me wishes 
his agent to be unknown to you, and I mayconfess
 at once that the title by which I have just cal
led myself isnot exactly my own.I was aware of i
t, said Holmes dryly.The circumstances are of gr
eat delicacy, and every precaution has tobe take
n to quench what might grow to be an immense sca
ndal andseriously compromise one of the reigning
 families of Europe. To speakplainly, the matter
 implicates the great House of Ormstein, heredit
arykings of Bohemia.I was also aware of that, mu
rmured Holmes, settling himself down inhis armch
air and closing his eyes.Our visitor glanced wit
h some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging
 figure of the man who had been no doubt depicte
d to him as themost incisive reasoner and most e
nergetic agent in Europe. Holmesslowly reopened 
his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic 
client.If your Majesty would condescend to state
 your case, he remarked, Ishould be better able 
to advise you.The man sprang from his chair and 
paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agit
ation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he t
orethe mask from his face and hurled it upon the
 ground. You are right,he cried; I am the King. 
Why should I attempt to conceal itWhy, indeed mu
rmured Holmes. Your Majesty had not spoken befor
e Iwas aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gotts
reich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of Casse
l-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia.But yo
u can understand, said our strange visitor, sitt
ing down oncemore and passing his hand over his 
high white forehead, you canunderstand that I am
 not accustomed to doing such business in my own
person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I co
uld not confide it toan agent without putting my
self in his power. I have come incognitofrom Pra
gue for the purpose of consulting you.Then, pray
 consult, said Holmes, shutting his eyes once mo
re.The facts are briefly these Some five years a
go, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the 
acquaintance of the well-known adventuress,Irene
 Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.Kin
dly look her up in my index, Doctor, murmured Ho
lmes withoutopening his eyes. For many years he 
had adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs 
concerning men and things, so that it was diffic
ult toname a subject or a person on which he cou
ld not at once furnishinformation. In this case 
I found her biography sandwiched in betweenthat 
of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander 
who had written amonograph upon the deep-sea fis
hes.Let me see said Holmes. Hum Born in New Jers
ey in the year 1858.Contralto-hum La Scala, hum 
Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw-yesRetired 
from operatic stage-ha Living in London-quite so
 YourMajesty, as I understand, became entangled 
with this young person,wrote her some compromisi
ng letters, and is now desirous of gettingthose 
letters back.Precisely so. But how-Was there a s
ecret marriageNone.No legal papers or certificat
esNone.Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If th
is young person shouldproduce her letters for bl
ackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove
 their authenticityThere is the writing.Pooh, po
oh Forgery.My private note-paper.Stolen.My own s
eal.Imitated.My photograph.Bought.We were both i
n the photograph.Oh, dear That is very bad Your 
Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion.I wa
s mad-insane.You have compromised yourself serio
usly.I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. 
I am but thirty now.It must be recovered.We have
 tried and failed.Your Majesty must pay. It must
 be bought.She will not sell.Stolen, then.Five a
ttempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay
 ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggag
e when she travelled. Twice she hasbeen waylaid.
 There has been no result.No sign of itAbsolutel
y none.Holmes laughed. It is quite a pretty litt
le problem, said he.But a very serious one to me
, returned the King reproachfully.Very, indeed. 
And what does she propose to do with the photogr
aphTo ruin me.But howI am about to be married.So
 I have heard.To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Menin
gen, second daughter of the King ofScandinavia. 
You may know the strict principles of her family
. She isherself the very soul of delicacy. A sha
dow of a doubt as to my conductwould bring the m
atter to an end.And Irene AdlerThreatens to send
 them the photograph. And she will do it. I know
 thatshe will do it. You do not know her, but sh
e has a soul of steel. Shehas the face of the mo
st beautiful of women, and the mind of the mostr
esolute of men. Rather than I should marry anoth
er woman, there are nolengths to which she would
 not go-none.You are sure that she has not sent 
it yetI am sure.And whyBecause she has said that
 she would send it on the day when thebetrothal 
was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monda
y.Oh, then we have three days yet, said Holmes w
ith a yawn. That isvery fortunate, as I have one
 or two matters of importance to look intojust a
t present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in
 London for thepresentCertainly. You will find m
e at the Langham under the name of the CountVon 
Kramm.Then I shall drop you a line to let you kn
ow how we progress.Pray do so. I shall be all an
xiety.Then, as to moneyYou have carte blanche.Ab
solutelyI tell you that I would give one of the 
provinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph.A
nd for present expensesThe King took a heavy cha
mois leather bag from under his cloak and laidit
 on the table.There are three hundred pounds in 
gold and seven hundred in notes, hesaid.Holmes s
cribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book
 and handed itto him.And Mademoiselles address h
e asked.Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. 
Johns Wood.Holmes took a note of it. One other q
uestion, said he. Was thephotograph a cabinetIt 
was.Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust 
that we shall soon havesome good news for you. A
nd good-night, Watson, he added, as thewheels of
 the royal brougham rolled down the street. If y
ou will begood enough to call to-morrow afternoo
n at three oclock I should liketo chat this litt
le matter over with you.

